20 SCIENCE
3 Separation of Substances
Grain is separated from stalks, while
harvesting. Milk or curd is churned to
separate the butter (Fig. 3.2). We gin
cotton to separate its seeds fromthe fibre.
Perhaps you might
have eaten salteddaliya or poha. If you
found that it hadchillies in it, you mayhave carefully taken
them out before eating.
Suppose you are given a basket
containing mangoes and guavas andasked to separate them. What would you
do? Pick out one kind and place themin a separate container, right?
Seems easy, but what if the materials
we want to separate are much smallerFig. 3.1 Separating tea leaves with a strainerFig. 3.2 Butter is taken out by churning milk or
curd
But, why would we need to
separate substances like this
at all, is what Paheli wants
to know.
Activity 1
In Column 1 of Table 3.1, are given a
few processes of separation. The purpose
of separation and the way separatedcomponents are used is mentioned in
Column 2 and 3 respectively. However,
the information given in Columns 2 and3 is jumbled up. Can you match eachIn our daily life, th ere are many
       instances when we notice a substance
   being separated from a mixture
of materials.
Tea leaves are separated from  the
liquid  with a strainer, while preparingtea (Fig. 3.1).
than mango or guava? Imagine you aregiven a glass of sand with salt mixed init. Impossible, even to think of
separating salt from this mixture by
picking out grains of sand by hand!
Rationalised 2023-24
21 SEPARATION  OF SUBSTANCES
process with its purpose and the way
separated components are used?
We see that, before we use a
substance, we need to separate harmfulor non-useful substances that may bemixed with it. Sometimes, we separateeven useful components if we need touse them separately.
The substances to be separated may
be particles of different sizes ormaterials. These may be in any threestates of matter i.e., solid, liquid or gas.So, how do we separate substancesmixed together if they have so manydifferent properties?
3.1  M ETHODS  OF SEPARATION
We will discuss some simple methods ofseparating substances that are mixed
together. You may come across some of
these methods being used in day to dayactivities.
Handpicking
Activity 2
Bring a packet of food grain purchasedfrom a shop to the classroom. Now,spread the grains on a sheet of paper.
Do you find only one kind of grain onthe sheet of paper? Are there pieces of
stone, husks, broken grain and particlesof any other grain in it? Now, remove
with your hand the pieces of stone,
husks and other grains from it.
This method of handpicking  can
be used for separating slightly largersized impurities like the pieces of dirt,stone, and husk from wheat, rice or
pulses (Fig. 3.3). The quantity of such
impurities is usually not very large.In such situations, we find that
handpicking is a convenient method of
separating substances.Table 3.1 Why do we separate substances?
n o i t a r a p e S
s s e c o r po d e w h c i h w r o f e s o p r u P
n o i t a r a p e s e h te h t h t i w o d e w o d t a h W
? s t n e n o p m o c d e t a r a p e s
e t a r a p e S ) 1
e c i r m o r f s e n o t s, t n e r e f f i d o w t e t a r a p e s o T ) a
. s t n e n o p m o c l u f e s u t u bd l i o s e h t y a w a w o r h t e W ) i
. t n e n o p m o c
k l i m g n i n r u h C ) 2
r e t t u b n i a t b o o tl u f e s u - n o n e v o m e r o T ) b
. s t n e n o p m o ce h t y a w a w o r h t e W ) i i
. s e i t i r u p m i
a e t e t a r a p e S ) 3
s e v a e lr o s e i t i r u p m i e v o m e r o T ) c
. s t n e n o p m o c l u f m r a he h t h t o b e s u e W ) i i i
. s t n e n o p m o c
Fig. 3.3  Handpicking stones from grain
Threshing
You must have seen bundles of wheator paddy stalks lying in fields after
Rationalised 2023-24
22 SCIENCE
harvesting the crop. Stalks are dried in
the sun before the grain is separatedfrom them. Each stalk has many grain
seeds attached to it. Imagine the
number of grain seeds in hundreds ofbundles of stalk lying in the field! How
does the farmer separate grain seeds
from those bundles of stalks?
One may pluck mangoes or guavas
from the trees. But, grain seeds aremuch smaller than mangoes or guavas.So, plucking them from their stalks
would be impossible. How does one
separate grain seeds from their stalks?
The process that is used to separate
grain from stalks etc. is threshing. In
this process, the stalks are beaten to freethe grain seeds (Fig. 3.4). Sometimes,this mixture on a plate or a newspaper.Look at this mixture carefully. Can thetwo different components be made out
easily? Are the sizes of particles of the
two components similar? Would it bepossible to separate the components by
handpicking?
Now, take your mixture to an open
ground and stand on a raised platform.Put the mixture in a plate or sheet of
paper. Hold the plate or the sheet ofpaper containing the mixture, at your
shoulder height. Tilt it slightly, so that
the mixture slides out slowly.
What happens? Do both the
components — sand and sawdust (orpowdered leaves) fall at the same place?Is there a component that blows away?
Did the wind manage to separate the
two components?
This method of separating
components of a mixture is calledwinnowing . Winnowing is used to
separate heavier and lighter components
of a mixture by wind or by blowing air.
Fig. 3.4 Threshing
threshing is done with the help of
bullocks.  Machines are also used to
thresh large quantities of grain.
Winnowing
Activity 3
Make a mixture of dry sand withsawdust or powdered dry leaves. Keep
Fig. 3.5 Winnowingsoop
husk
graindirection of the air
Rationalised 2023-24
23 SEPARATION  OF SUBSTANCES
This method is commonly used by
farmers to separate lighter husk particlesfrom heavier seeds of grain (Fig. 3.5).
The husk particles are carried away
by the wind. The seeds of grain getseparated and form a heap near the
platform for winnowing. The separated
husk is used for many purposes suchas fodder for cattles.
Sieving
Sometimes, we may wish to prepare adish with flour. We need to remove
impurities and bran that may be present
in it. What do we do? We use a sieveand pour the flour into it (Fig. 3.6).
Sieving allows the fine flour particles
to pass through the holes of the sievewhile the bigger impurities  remain on
the sieve.
In a flour mill, impurities like husk
and stones are removed from wheatbefore grinding it. Usually, a bagful of
wheat is poured on a slanting sieve. Thesieving removes pieces of stones, stalk
and husk that may still remain with
wheat after threshing and winnowing.to separate pebbles and stones fromsand (Fig. 3.7).
Activity 4
Bring a sieve and a small quantity of
flour from home, to the class. Sieve the
flour to separate any impurities in it.Now, make a fine powder of chalk pieces
and mix it with the flour. Can we
separate the flour and the powderedchalk by sieving?
Sieving is used when components of
a mixture have different sizes.
Sedimentation, Decantation
and Filtration
Sometimes, it may not be possible to
separate components of a mixture bywinnowing and handpicking. For
example, there may be lighter impurities
like dust or soil particles in rice orpulses. How are such impurities
separated from rice or pulses before
cooking?
Rice or pulses are usually washed
before cooking. When you add water tothese, the impurities like dust particlesFig. 3.6 Sieving
You may have also noticed similar
sieves being used at construction sitesFig. 3.7 Pebbles and stones are removed from
sand by sieving
Rationalised 2023-24
24 SCIENCE
get separated. These impurities go into
water. Now, what will sink to the bottomof the vessel — rice or dust? Why? Have
you seen that the vessel is tilted to pour
out the dirty water?
When the heavier component in a
mixture settles after water is added toit, the process is called sedimentation.When the water (along with the dust) is
removed, the process is called
decantation (Fig. 3.8).  Let us find a
few other mixtures that can be separated
through sedimentation and
decantation.
The same principle is used for
separating a mixture of two liquids thatdo not mix with each other. For example,oil and water from their mixture can be
separated by this process. If a mixture of
such liquids is allowed to stand for sometime, they form two separate layers. The
component that forms the top layer can
then be separated by decantation.
Let us again consider a mixure of a
solid and liquid. After preparing tea,what do you do to remove the tea leaves?Usually, we use stainer to remove tea
leaves. Try decantation. It helps a little.
But, do you still get a few leaves in yourtea? Now, pour the tea through astrainer. Did all the tea leaves remainin the strainer? This process is calledfiltration (Fig. 3.1). Which method of
separating tea leaves from prepared tea
is better, decantation or filtration?
Let us now consider the example
of water that we use. Do all of us, atall times, get safe water to drink?Sometimes, water supplied through taps
may be muddy. The water collected from
ponds or rivers may also be muddy,especially after rains. Let us see if we
can use some method of separation to
remove insoluble impurities like soilfrom the water.
Activity 5
Collect some muddy water from a pond
or a river. If it is not available, mix some
soil to water in a glass. Let it stand forhalf an hour. Observe the water
carefully and note your observations.
Does some soil settle at the bottom
of water? Why? What will you call thisprocess?
Now, slightly tilt the glass without
disturbing the water. Let the water fromthe top flow into another glass (Fig. 3.8).
What will you call this process?
Is the water in the second glass still
muddy or brown in colour? Now filterit. Did the tea strainer work? Let us tryfiltering the water through a piece of
cloth. In a piece of cloth, small holes or
pores remain in between the woventhreads. These pores in a cloth can be
used as a filter.
If the water is still muddy, impurities
can be separated by a filter that has even
Fig. 3.8 Separating two components of a mixture
by sedimentation and decantationundissolved
material
(soil)mixture
(soil + water)
Rationalised 2023-24
25 SEPARATION  OF SUBSTANCES
Fruit and vegetable juices are usually
filtered before drinking to separate the
seeds and solid particles of pulp. Themethod of filtration is also used in the
process of preparing cottage cheese
(paneer) in our homes. You might haveseen that for making paneer , a few drops
of lemon juice are added to milk as itboils. This gives a mixture of particlesof solid paneer and a liquid. The paneer
is then separated by filtering the mixturethrough a fine cloth or a strainer.
Evaporation
Activity 6
Add two spoons of salt to water inanother beaker and stir it well. Do yousmaller pores. A filter paper is one such
filter that has very fine pores in it.Fig. 3.9 shows the steps involved in
using a filter paper. A filter paper folded
in the form of a cone is fixed onto afunnel (Fig. 3.10). The mixture is then
poured on the filter paper. Solid
particles in the mixture do not passthrough it and remain on the filter.
Fig. 3.11  Heating a beaker containing salt water
see any change in the colour of water?Can you see any salt in the beaker, after
stirring? Heat the beaker containing the
salt water (Fig. 3.11). Let the water boilaway. What is left in the beaker?
In this activity, we used the process
of evaporation, to separate a mixture ofwater and salt.
The process of conversion of water
into its vapour is called evaporation.
The process of evaporation takes place
continuously wherever water is present.
Where do you think, salt comes
from? Sea water contains many saltsmixed in it. One of these salts is the
common salt. When sea water is allowedto stand in shallow pits, water gets
heated by sunlight and slowly turns into
water vapour, through evaporation. Ina few days, the water evaporates
completely leaving behind the solid salts
(Fig. 3.12). Common salt is thenobtained from this mixture of salts by
further purification.Fig. 3.9 Folding a filter
paper to make a coneFig. 3.10 Filtration
using a filter paper
Rationalised 2023-24
26 SCIENCE
Use of more than one method
of separation
We have studied some methods for
separation of substances from their
mixtures. Often, one method is not
sufficient to separate the differentsubstances present in a mixture. In such
a situation, we need to use more than
one of these methods.
Activity 7
Take a mixture of sand and salt. How
will we separate these? We already saw
that handpicking would not be apractical method for separating these.
Keep this mixture in a beaker and
add some water to it. Leave the beakeraside for some time. Do you see the sand
settling down at the bottom? The sand
can be separated by decantation orfiltration. What does the decanted liquid
contain? Do you think this water
contains the salt which was there in themixture at the beginning?
Now, we need to separate salt and
water from the decanted liquid. Transferthis liquid to a kettle and close its lid.
Heat the kettle for some time. Do younotice steam coming out from the spout
of the kettle?
Take a metal plate with some ice on
it. Hold the plate just above the spoutof the kettle as shown in Fig. 3.13. Whatdo you observe? Let all the water in the
kettle boil off.
When the steam comes in contact
with the metal plate cooled with ice,  itcondenses and forms liquid water. The
water drops that you observed fallingfrom the plate, were due to condensation
of steam. The process of conversion of
water vapour into its liquid form iscalled condensation .
Did you ever see water drops
condensed under a plate that has beenused to cover a vessel containing milk
that has just been boiled?
After all the water has evaporated,
what is left behind in the kettle?
We have thus,  separated salt, sand
and water using processes of
decantation, filtration, evaporation and
condensation.
Paheli faced a problem while
recovering salt mixed with sand. Shehas mixed a packet of salt in a smallFig. 3.12  Obtaining salt from sea water
Fig. 3.13  Evaporation and condensation
Rationalised 2023-24
27 SEPARATION  OF SUBSTANCES
amount of sand. She then tried the
method suggested in Activity 7, torecover the salt. She found, however,
that she could recover only a small part
of the salt that she had taken. Whatcould have gone wrong?
Can water dissolve any
amount of a substance?
In chapter 2, we found that many
substances dissolve in water and form
a solution. We say that these substances
are soluble in water. What will happenif we go on adding more and more of
these substances to a fixed quantity of
water?
Activity 8
You will need a beaker or a small pan, a
spoon, salt and water. Pour half a cup
of water in the beaker. Add oneteaspoonful of salt and stir it well, until
the salt dissolves completely (Fig 3.14).
Again add a teaspoonful of salt and stirwell. Go on adding salt, one teaspoonful
at a time, and stir.
After adding a few spoons of salt, do
you find that some salt remainsundissolved and settles at the bottom
of the beaker? If yes, this means thatno more salt can be dissolved in the
amount of water we have taken. The
solution is now said to be saturated.
Here is a hint as to what might have
gone wrong when Paheli tried to recoverlarge quantity of salt mixed with sand.Perhaps the quantity of salt was much
more than that required to form a
saturated solution. The undissolved saltwould have remained mixed with thesand and could not be recovered. She
could solve her problem by using a
larger quantity of water.
Suppose, she did not have sufficient
quantity of water to dissolve all the saltin the mixture. Is there some way thatwater could be made to dissolve more
salt before the solution gets saturated?
Let us try and help Paheli out.
Activity 9
Take some water in a beaker and mixsalt in it until it cannot dissolve any
more salt. This will give you a saturatedsolution of salt in water.
Now, add a small quantity of salt to
this saturated solution and heat it. Whatdo you find? What happens to the
undissolved salt in the bottom of the
beaker? Does it dissolve, now? If yes,can some more salt be dissolved in this
solution by heating it?
Let this hot solution cool. Does the
salt appear to settle at the bottom of thebeaker again?
The activity suggests that larger
quantity of salt can be dissolved in wateron heating.Fig 3.14 Dissolving salt in water
Rationalised 2023-24
28 SCIENCE
Does water dissolve equal amounts
of different soluble substances? Let us
find out.
Activity 10
Take two glasses and pour half a cup
of water in each of them. Add a teaspoon
of salt to one glass and stir till the saltdissolves. Go on adding salt, one
teaspoon at a time, till the solution
saturates. Record the number of spoonsof salt that dissolved in the water, in
Table 3.2. Now, repeat the same
activity with sugar. Repeat this withsome other substances that are soluble
in water.
What do you notice from Table 3.2?
Do you find that water dissolves differentsubstances in different amounts?Table 3.2
e c n a t s b u Sf o s n o o p s f o r e b m u N
t a h t e c n a t s b u s
r e t a w n i d e v l o s s i d
t l a S
r a g u S
We have discussed a few methods of
separating substances. Some of the
methods of separation presented in thischapter are also used in a science
laboratory.
We also learnt that a solution is
prepared by dissolving a substance in aliquid. A solution is said to be saturated
if it cannot dissolve more of thesubstance in it.
g n i n r u h C
n o i t a s n e d n o C
n o i t a t n a c e D
n o i t a r o p a v E
n o i t a r t l i F
g n i k c i p d n a Hn o i t u l o s d e t a r u t a S
n o i t a t n e m i d e S
g n i v e i S
n o i t u l o S
g n i h s e r h T
g n i w o n n i W
  Handpicking, winnowing, sieving, sedimentation, decantation and
filtration are some of the methods of separating substances from their
mixtures.
Rationalised 2023-24
29 SEPARATION  OF SUBSTANCESiii
1. Why do we need to separate different components of a mixture? Give two
examples.
2. What is winnowing? Where is it used?
3. How will you separate husk or dirt particles from a given sample of pulses before
cooking.
4. What is sieving? Where is it used?
5. How will you separate sand and water from their mixture?6. Is it possible to separate sugar mixed with wheat flour? If yes, how will you do it?7. How would you obtain clear water from a sample of muddy water?8. Fill up the blanks
(a) The method of separating seeds of paddy  from its stalks is called ___________.(b) When milk, cooled after boiling, is poured onto a piece of cloth the cream
(malai ) is left behind on it. This process of separating cream from  milk is an
example of ___________.
(c) Salt is obtained from seawater by the process of ___________.(d) Impurities settled at the bottom when muddy water was kept overnight in a
bucket. The clear water was then poured off from the top. The process of
separation used in this example is called ___________.
9. True or false?
(a) A mixture of milk and water can be separated by filtration.
(b) A mixture of powdered salt and sugar can be separated by the process of
winnowing.  Husk and stones could be separated from grains by handpicking.
  Husk is separated from heavier seeds of grain by winnowing.
  Difference in the size of particles in a mixture is utilised to separate
them by the process of sieving and filtration.
  In a mixture of sand and water, the heavier sand particles settle down
at the bottom and the water can be separated by decantation.
  Filtration can be used to separate components of a mixture of an insoluble
solid and a liquid.
  Evaporation is the process in which a liquid gets converted into its vapour.
Evaporation can be used to separate a solid dissolved in a liquid.
  A saturated solution is one in which no more of that substance can be
dissolved.
  More of a substance can be dissolved  in a solution by heating it.
  Water dissolves different amount of soluble substances in it.
Rationalised 2023-24
30 SCIENCE
SUGGESTED PROJECTS AND ACTIVITIES
 1. Visit a nearby dairy and report about the processes used to separate cream
from milk.
 2. You have tried a number of methods to separate impurities like mud from
water. Sometimes, the water obtained after employing all these processes could
still be a little muddy. Let us see if we can remove even this impurity completely.Take this filtered water in a glass. Tie a thread to a small piece of alum.Suspend the piece of alum in the water and swirl. Did the water become clear?What happened to the mud? This process is called loading. Talk to some eldersin your family to find out whether they have seen or used this process.(c) Separation of sugar from tea can be done with filtration.
(d) Grain and husk can be separated with the process of decantation.
10. Lemonade is prepared by mixing lemon juice and sugar in water. You wish to
add ice to cool it. Should you add ice to the lemonade before or after dissolving
sugar? In which case would it be possible to dissolve more sugar?
THINGS TO SEE
“The winnowers”, painted by Gustav Courbet in 1853
Reproduced with permission from Museè de Beaus Arts, Nantes, France
Rationalised 2023-24
