11 Air Around us
We have learnt in Chapter 6 that
all living things require air.
But, have you ever seen air?
You might not have seen air, but, surely
you must have felt its presence in so
many ways. You notice it when the
leaves of the trees rustle or the clotheshanging on a clothes-line sway. Pages
of an open book begin fluttering
when the fan is switched on. The movingair makes it possible for you to fly your
kite. Do you remember Activity 3 in
Chapter 3 in which you separated thesand and sawdust by winnowing?
Winnowing is more effective in moving
air. You may have noticed that duringstorms the wind blows at a very high
speed. It may even uproot trees and blow
off the rooftops.
Have you ever played with a firki
(Fig. 11.1)?Move it a little, back andforth. Observe, what happens.Does the firki rotate? What makes a firki
rotate — moving air, isn’t it?
Have you seen a weather cock
(Fig. 11.3)? It shows the direction in
which the air is moving at that place.
Fig. 11.1  Different types of  firki
Fig. 11.2 Making a simple firki
Fig. 11.3  A weather cock
Activity 1
Let us make a firki of our own, following
the instructions shown in Fig. 11.2.
Hold the stick of the firki and place it
in different directions in an open area.11.1 I S AIR PRESENT  EVERYWHERE
AROUND  US?
Close your fist — what do you have init? Nothing? Try the following activity
to find out.
Activity 2
Take an empty open bottle. Is it really
empty or does it have something inside?
Turn it, upside down. Is somethinginside it, now?
Rationalised 2023-24
116 SCIENCENow, dip the open mouth of the bottle
into the bucket filled with water as
shown in Fig. 11.4. Observe the bottle.
Does water enter the bottle? Now tilt thebottle slightly. Does the water now enterthe bottle? Do you see bubbles coming
out of the bottle or hear any bubbly
sound? Can you now guess what was
in the bottle?
Yes! You are right. It is “air”, that was
present in the bottle. The bottle was notempty at all. In fact, it was filled
completely with air even when you
turned it upside down. That is why younotice that water does not enter the
bottle when it is pushed in an inverted
position, as there was no space for air
to escape. When the bottle was tilted,
the air was able to come out in the form
of bubbles, and water filled up the empty
space that the air has occupied.
This activity shows that air occupies
space. It fills all the space in the bottle.It is present everywhere around us. Air
has no colour and one can see throughit. It is transparent.
Our earth is surrounded by a thin
layer of air. This layer extends up to
many kilometres above the surface ofthe earth and is called atmosphere. As
we move higher in the atmosphere, the
air gets rarer.
Fig. 11.4  Experiments with an empty bottle
Fig. 11.5  Mountaineers carry oxygen cylinders
with them
Now can you think, mountaineers
carry oxygen cylinders with them, while
climbing high mountains (Fig. 11.5)?
11.2 W HAT IS AIR MADE UP OF?
Until the eighteenth century, peoplethought that air was just one substance.
Experiments have proved that it is reallynot so. Air is a mixture of many gases.
What kind of a mixture is it? Let us find
out about some of the majorcomponents of this mixture, one by one.
Water vapour
We have learnt earlier that air contains
water vapour. We also saw that, when
air comes in contact with a cool surface,it condenses and drops of water appear
on the cooled surfaces. The presence of
water vapour in air is important for thewater cycle in nature.
Oxygen
Activity 3
In the presence of your teacher, fix twosmall candles of the same length on a
Rationalised 2023-24
117 AIR AROUND  UStable. Light both the candles. Cover one
of the candles with an inverted glass
tumbler. Observe both the candlescarefully.
Do both the candles continue to burn
or go off?
You must have observed that the
candle covered with glass tumbler gotextinguished after some time, whereasthe other candle continued burning.
What can be the reason for this?
Think about it.
It seems that the candle got
extinguished because the componentinside of the glass tumbler, whichsupports burning, is limited. Most of the
component is used up by the burning
candles. However, the other candle isgetting continued supply of air. This
component of air, which supports
burning, is known as oxygen.
Nitrogen
In Activity 3 did you observe that air isstill present in the glass bottle even afterthe candle blew out? This indicates thepresence of some component in the air,which does not support burning. The
major part of air (which does not
support burning candle) is nitrogen.
Carbon dioxide
In a closed room, if there is some
material that is burning, you may
have felt suffocation. This is due toexcess of carbon dioxide that may be
accumulating in the room, as the
burning continues. Carbon dioxidemakes up a small component of the air
around us. Plants and animals consume
oxygen for respiration and producecarbon dioxide. Plant and animal matter
also consumes oxygen on burning and
produces mainly carbon dioxide and afew other gases. It is advisable not to
burn dry leaves and discarded remains
of the crop, which pollute oursurroundings.
Dust and smoke
The burning of fuel also producessmoke. Smoke contains a few gases andfine dust particles and is often harmful.
That is why you see long chimneys in
factories. This takes the harmful smokeand gases away from our noses, but,
brings it closer to the birds flying up in
the sky!
Dust particles are always present
in air.
Activity 4
Find a sunny room in your school/home. Close all the doors and windowswith curtains pulled down to make theFig. 15.6 Air has oxygen
Fig. 11.6 Air has oxygenCandleGlass tumbler
Rationalised 2023-24
118 SCIENCE
room dark. Now, open the door or a
window facing the sun, just a little, in
such a way that it allows sunlight toenter the room only through a slit.
Look carefully at the incoming beam
of sunlight.
Do you see some tiny shining
particles moving in the beam of sunlight(Fig. 11.7)? What are these particles?
During winters you might have
observed similar beam of sunlight filterthrough the trees in which dust particlesappear to dance merrily around!
This shows that air also contains
dust particles. The presence of dustparticles in air varies from time to time,
and from place to place.
We inhale air when we breathe
through our nostrils. Fine hair and
mucus are present inside the nose toPaheli  wants to know, why
the transparent glass of
windows, if not wiped off
regularly, appears hazy?
Fig. 11.7  Observing presence of dust in air with
sunlightFig.11.8  Policemen regulating traffic at a crowded
crossing often wear a mask
Boojho wants to know, why
during an incident of
fire, one is advised towrap a woollen blanket
over a burning object.
Boojho is asking you, why
do you think, the policeman
in Fig.11.8 is wearing a
mask?
prevent dust particles from getting into
the respiratory system.
Do you recall being scolded by your
parents when you breathe through yourmouth? If you do that, harmful dustparticles may enter your body.
We may conclude, then, that air
contains some gases, water vapour anddust particles. The gases in air are
mainly nitrogen, oxygen, small amount
of carbon dioxide, and many othergases. However, there may be some
Rationalised 2023-24
119 AIR AROUND  US
of the container. Do you see tiny bubbles
on the inside (Fig. 11.10)?
These bubbles come from the air
dissolved in water. When you heat thewater, to begin with, the air dissolved in
it escapes. As you continue heating, thewater itself turns into vapour and finally
begins to boil. We learnt in Chapters 5
and 6, that the animals living in wateruse the dissolved oxygen in water.
The organisms that live in soil also
need oxygen to respire, isn’t it? How dothey get the air they need, for
respiration?
Activity 6
Take a lump of dry soil in a beaker or a
glass. Add water to it and note whathappens (Fig. 11.11). Do you see
bubbles coming out from soil? These
bubbles indicate the presence of air inthe soil.
When the water is poured on the
lump of soil, it displaces the air whichis seen in the form of bubbles. The
organisms that live inside the soil and
the plant roots respire in this air. A lot
Fig. 11.10 Water contains airvariations in the composition of air fromplace to place. We see that air containsmostly nitrogen and oxygen. In fact,
these two gases together make up 99%
of the air. The remaining 1% isconstituted by carbon dioxide and a few
other gases and water vapour (Fig. 11.9).
11.3 H OW DOES OXYGEN  BECOME
AVAILABLE  TO ANIMALS  AND PLANTS
LIVING IN WATER AND SOIL?
Activity 5
Take some water in a glass or metalcontainer. Heat it slowly on a tripod
stand. Well before the water begins toboil, look carefully at the inner surface
Here is a question from Paheli, “Will
the tiny air bubbles seen before the
water actually boils, also appear ifwe do this activity by reheating
boiled water kept in an air tight
bottle?” If you do not knowthe answer you may try doing
it and see for yourself.
Nitrogenoxygencarbon dioxide,
water vapourand other gases
Fig.11.9  Composition of air
Rationalised 2023-24
120 SCIENCEof burrows and holes are formed in deep
soil by the animals living in the soil.
These burrows also make spacesavailable for air to move in and out of
the soil. However, when it rains heavily,
water fills up all the spaces occupied bythe air in the soil. In this situation,
animals living in the soil have to come
out for respiration. Could this be thereason why earthworms come out of the
soil, only during heavy rains?
Have you ever wondered why all the
oxygen of atmosphere does not get usedup though a large number of organisms
are consuming it? Who is refilling theoxygen in the atmosphere?
11.4 H OW IS THE OXYGEN  IN THE
ATMOSPHERE  REPLACED ?
In Chapter 4, we read about
photosynthesis. In this process, plants
make their own food and oxygen isproduced along with it. Plants also
consume oxygen for respiration, but
they produce more of it than theyconsume. That is why we say plants
produce oxygen.
It is obvious that animals cannot live
without plants. The balance of oxygenThe wind makes the windmill
rotate. The windmill is used to drawwater from tubewells and to run flour
mills. Windmills are also used togenerate electricity. Air helps in the
movements of sailing yachts, gliders,
parachutes and aeroplanes. Birds,bats and insects can fly due to the
presence of air. Air also helps in the
dispersal of seeds and pollen offlowers of several plants. Air plays an
important role in water cycle.Fig. 11.12  A windmill
Fig. 11.11  Soil has air in itand carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
is maintained through respiration inplants and animals and by the
photosynthesis in plants. This shows
the interdependence of plants andanimals.
We can now appreciate, how important
air is for life on earth. Are there any otheruses of air? Have you heard about a
windmill? Look at Fig. 11.12.
Rationalised 2023-24
121 AIR AROUND  US
Air is found everywhere. We cannot see air, but we can feel it.
Air in motion is called wind.
Air occupies space.
Air is present in water and soil.
Air is a mixture of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapour and a few
other gases. Some dust particles may also be present in it.
Oxygen supports burning and is necessary for living organisms.
The envelope of air that surrounds the earth is known as atmosphere.
Atmosphere is essential for life on earth.
Aquatic animals use dissolved air in water for respiration.
Plants and animals depend on each other for exchange of oxygen and carbon
dioxide from air.e r e h p s o m t A
e d i x o i d n o b r a C
r i a f o n o i t i s o p m o C
n e g y x O
n e g o r t i N
e k o m S
l l i m d n i W
1.    What is the composition of air?
2. Which gas in the atmosphere is essential for respiration?3. How will you prove that air supports burning?4. How will you show that air is dissolved in water?5. Why does a lump of cotton wool shrink in water?
Rationalised 2023-24
122 SCIENCESUGGESTED PROJECTS AND ACTIVITIES
1. On a clear glass window facing towards an open area, fix a small rectangular
strip of paper. Remove the strip after a few days. Do you notice a difference
between the rectangular section that was left covered with paper and therest of the glass window? By repeating this exercise every month, you canhave an idea about the amount of dust present in air around you at differenttimes of the year.
2. Observe the leaves of trees, shrubs or bushes planted by the roadside. Note
whether their leaves have some dust or soot deposited over them. Take similarobservations with the leaves of trees in the school compound or in a garden.Is there any difference in deposition of soot on leaves of trees near the roadside?What could be the possible reasons for this difference? Take a map of yourcity or town and try to identify regions in the map where you have noticedvery thick layer of soot on the plants by the roadside. Compare with resultsobtained by other classmates and mark these areas on the map. Perhapsthe results from all the students could be summarised and reported innewspapers.6. The layer of air around the earth is known as ___________.
7. The component of air used by green plants to make their food, is ___________.8. List five activities that are possible due to the presence of air.9. How do plants and animals help each other in the exchange of gases in the
atmosphere?
Rationalised 2023-24
Notes
Rationalised 2023-24
Notes
Rationalised 2023-24
