43 
kingdoms , kings and 
an early republicHow some men became rulers
Choosing leaders or rulers by voting is something 
that has become common during the last fifty years or so. How did men become rulers in the past? Around 3000 years ago, some men became recognised as rajas by performing big sacrifices. 
The ashvamedha  or horse sacrifice was one 
such ritual. A horse was let loose to wander freely and it was guarded by the raja’s men. If the horse wandered into the kingdoms of other rajas and 
they stopped it, they had to fight. If they allowed the horse to pass, it meant that they accepted that the raja who wanted to perform the sacrifice was 
stronger than them. These rajas were then invited 
to the sacrifice, which was performed by specially trained priests, who were rewarded with gifts. The raja who organised the sacrifice was recognised as being very powerful, and all those who came brought gifts for him.  
The raja was a central figure in these rituals. 
He often had a special seat, a throne or a tiger skin. His charioteer, who was his companion in the battlefield and witnessed his exploits, chanted tales of his glory. His relatives, especially his wives and sons, had to perform a variety of minor rituals.  CHAPTER 5
KINGDOMS, KINGS AND  
AN EARL Y REPUBLIC
Election day
Shankaran woke up to see his grandparents all ready to go 
and vote. They wanted to be the first to reach the polling booth. Why, Shankaran wanted to know, were they so excited? Somewhat impatiently, his grandfather explained: “We can choose our own rulers today.”
Chapter 5-6.indd   43 22 April 2022   12:49:54
Rationalised 2023-24
Painted Grey Ware.
Plates and bowls are the most common vessels made out of Painted Grey Ware. These are extremely fine to touch, with a nice, smooth surface. Perhaps these were used on special occasions, for important people, and to serve special food.  
The other rajas were simply spectators who had 
to sit and watch the performance of the sacrifice. 
Priests performed the rituals including the sprinkling of sacred water on the king. The ordinary people, the vish or vaishya , also brought gifts. 
However, some people, such as those who were regarded as shudras by the priests, were excluded 
from many rituals. 
Make a list of all those who would be present 
at the sacrifice. Which are the categories that are described in terms of their occupation? 
Varnas
There were four social categories, namely Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras. Brahmins were expected to study (and teach) the Vedas, perform sacrifices and receive gifts. 
Kshatriyas were expected to fight battles and protect people. Vaishyas were expected to be farmers, herders, and traders. The Shudras were expected to serve the other three groups.
Janapadas
The rajas who performed these big sacrifices 
were now recognised as being rajas of janapadas   
rather than janas. The word janapada literally 
means the land where the jana set its foot, and 
settled down. Some important janapadas  are 
shown on Map 4 (page 45).
Archaeologists have excavated a number 
of settlements in these janapadas , such 
as Purana Qila in Delhi, Hastinapura near 
Meerut, and Atranjikhera, near Etah (the last two are in Uttar Pradesh). They found that people lived in huts, and kept cattle as well as other animals. They also grew a variety of crops — rice, wheat, barley, pulses, sugarcane, sesame and mustard.  
Is there a crop in this list that was not 
mentioned in Chapter 3?
Chapter 5-6.indd   44 26 May 2022   10:45:40
Rationalised 2023-24
45 
kingdoms , kings and 
an early republicThey made earthen pots. Some of these were 
grey in colour, others were red. One special type 
of pottery found at these sites is known as Painted Grey Ware. As is obvious from the name, these grey pots had painted designs, usually simple lines and geometric patterns. 
Mahajanapadas
About 2500 years ago, some janapadas  became 
more important than others, and were known as mahajanapadas. Some of these are shown on Map 
4. Most mahajanapadas  had a capital city, many 
of these were fortified. This means that huge walls 
of wood, brick or stone were built around them.
Forts were probably built because people were 
afraid of attacks from other kings and needed 
Map : 4 
Important Janapadas,           
Mahajanapadas and Cities 
Chapter 5-6.indd   45 22 April 2022   12:49:58
Rationalised 2023-24
 46
our pasts–iThe fortification wall at 
Kaushambi.  
This is a picture of 
remains of a wall made of brick, found near present-day Allahabad (Uttar Pradesh). A part of it was probably built 
about 2500 years ago.  
protection. It is also likely that some rulers 
wanted to show how rich and powerful they were 
by building really large, tall and impressive walls around their cities. Also in this way, the land and the people living inside the fortified area could be controlled more easily by the king. Building such huge walls required a great deal of planning. Thousands, if not lakhs of bricks or stones had to be prepared. This in turn meant enormous labour, provided, possibly, by thousands of men, women and children. And resources had to be found for all of this.
Chapter 5-6.indd   46 22 April 2022   12:49:58
Rationalised 2023-24
47 
kingdoms , kings and 
an early republicThe new rajas now began maintaining armies. 
Soldiers were paid regular salaries and maintained 
by the king throughout the year. Some payments were probably made using punch marked coins (see the illustration on page 75). You will read more about these coins in Chapter 8.  
List two ways in which the rajas  of the 
mahajanapadas  were different from those 
mentioned in the Rigveda. 
T axes
As the rulers of the mahajanapadas  were  
(a) building huge forts (b) maintaining big armies, they needed more resources. And they needed officials to collect these. So, instead of depending on occasional gifts brought by people, as in the case of the raja of the janapadas , they started collecting 
regular taxes.
• Taxes on crops 
• Taxes on craftspersons 
• Herders paid taxes as animals and animal produce. 
• Taxes on goods through trade.
• Hunters and gatherers had to provide forest produce 
to the raja. 
 What do you think would have been provided 
by hunters and gatherers?
Changes in agriculture
There were two major changes in agriculture around this time. One was the growing use of iron ploughshares. This meant that heavy, clayey soil could be turned over better than with a wooden ploughshare, so that more grain could be produced. Second, people began transplanting 
Chapter 5-6.indd   47 22 April 2022   12:49:58
Rationalised 2023-24
 48
our pasts–ipaddy. This meant that instead of scattering seed 
on the ground, from which plants would sprout, saplings were grown and then planted in the fields. This led to increased production, as many more plants survived. 
Can you think why kings would encourage these 
changes? 
A closer look — (a) Magadha  
Find Magadha on Map 4 (page 45). Magadha became the most important mahajanapada  in 
about two hundred years. Many rivers such as the Ganga and Son flowed through Magadha. This was important for (a) transport, (b) water supplies    (c) making the land fertile. Parts of Magadha were forested. Elephants, which lived in the forest, could be captured and trained for the army. Forests also provided wood for building houses, carts and chariots. Besides, there were iron ore mines in the region that could be tapped to make strong tools and weapons.
Magadha had two very powerful rulers, Bimbisara 
and Ajatasattu, who used all possible means to conquer other janapadas . Mahapadma Nanda was 
another important ruler. He extended his control up to the north-west part of the subcontinent. Rajagriha (present-day Rajgir) in Bihar was the capital of Magadha for several years. Later the capital was shifted to Pataliputra (present-day Patna).
More than 2300 years ago, a ruler named 
Alexander, who lived in Macedonia in Europe, wanted to become a world conqueror. Of course, he didn’t conquer the world, but did conquer parts of Egypt and West Asia, and came to the Indian subcontinent, reaching up to the banks of the Beas. When he wanted to march further eastwards, his soldiers refused. They were scared, as they had 
Chapter 5-6.indd   48 22 April 2022   12:49:58
Rationalised 2023-24
49 
kingdoms , kings and 
an early republicheard that the rulers of India had vast armies of 
foot soldiers, chariots and elephants.
In what ways were these armies different from 
those described in the Rigveda? 
A closer look — (b) Vajji
While Magadha became a powerful kingdom, Vajji, with its capital at Vaishali (Bihar), was under a different form of government, known as gana or 
sangha . 
In a gana or a sangha  there were not one, but 
many rulers and each one was known as a raja. 
These rajas performed rituals together. They also 
met in assemblies, and decided what had to be done and how, through discussion and debate. For example, if they were attacked by an enemy, they met to discuss what should be done to meet the threat. However, women, dasas and kammakaras 
could not participate in these assemblies. 
This is an account of the Vajjis from the Digha 
Nikaya, a famous Buddhist book, which contains 
some of the speeches of the Buddha. These were written down about 2300 years ago.
Ajatasattu and the Vajjis
Ajatasattu wanted to attack the Vajjis. He sent his minister named Vassakara to the Buddha to get his 
advice on the matter.  
The Buddha asked whether the Vajjis met 
frequently, in full assemblies. When he heard that they did, he replied that the Vajjis would continue to prosper as long as:
• They held full and frequent public assemblies.  
• They met and acted together.  
• They followed established rules.  
• They respected, supported and listened to elders.KEYWORDS
raja 
ashvamedha  
varna 
janapada 
mahajanapada 
fortification 
army 
tax 
transplantation 
gana or sangha
Chapter 5-6.indd   49 22 April 2022   12:49:58
Rationalised 2023-24
 50
our pasts–i• Vajji women were not held by force or captured.  
• Chaityas (local shrines) were maintained in both 
towns and villages.  
• Wise saints who followed different beliefs were 
respected and allowed to enter and leave the 
country freely.  
In what ways was the Vajji sangha different from 
the other mahajanapadas?  Try and list at least three 
differences.
Rajas  of powerful kingdoms tried to conquer the 
sanghas . Nevertheless, these lasted for a very long 
time, till about 1500 years ago, when the last of the 
ganas or sanghas  were conquered by the Gupta 
rulers, about whom you will read in Chapter 9. 
Imagine
You are peeping through a crack in the walls of the assembly of Vaishali, where a meeting is in progress to discuss ways to deal with an attack by the king of Magadha. Describe what you might hear. 
Let’s recall 
1. State whether true or false:
(a) Rajas who let the ashvamedha horse pass   
 through their lands were invited to the sacrifice. 
(b) The charioteer sprinkled sacred water on the kin g.
(c) Archaeologists have found palaces in the   
 settlements of the janapadas.
(d) Pots to store grain were made out of Painted   
 Grey Ware.
(e) Many cities in mahajanapadas were fortified. 
Chapter 5-6.indd   50 22 April 2022   12:49:59
Rationalised 2023-24
51 
kingdoms , kings and 
an early republic2. Fill in the chart given below with the terms: hunter-
gatherers, farmers, traders, craftspersons, herders.
3. Who were the groups who could not participate in the 
assemblies of the ganas? 
Let’s discuss
4. Why did the rajas of mahajanapadas  build forts? 
Let’s do
5. Were there any janapadas in your state? If yes, name 
them. If not, name the janapadas that would have been 
the closest to your state, and mention whether they 
were to the east, west, north or south. 
6. Find out whether the groups mentioned in answer 3 
have voting rights at present. THE RAJA OF THE 
MAHAJANAPADATHOSE WHO PAID TAXES 
	New kinds of rajas 
(about 3000 years ago)
	Mahajanapadas (about 2500 years ago)
	Alexander’s invasion, composition of the Digha Nikaya (about 
2300 years ago)  
	End of the ganas  or sanghas (about 1 500 years ago) SOME IMPORTANT
DATES
Chapter 5-6.indd   51 22 April 2022   12:49:59
Rationalised 2023-24
