8Light, Shadows and
Reflections
We see so many objects around
us. On the way to school wesee things like buses, cars,
cycles, trees, animals and sometimesflowers. How do you think, we seeobjects?
Think of the same places at night
time if it were completely dark. What willyou see? Suppose you go inside a
completely dark room. Are you able to
see any objects in the room?
But, when you light a candle or a
torch you can see the objects present inthe room, isn’t it? Without light, thingscannot be seen. Light helps us see
objects.
The torch bulb is an object that gives
out light of its own. The Sun, is anotherfamiliar object that gives its own light.
During the day, its light allows us tosee objects. Objects like the sun that
give out or emit light of their own are
called luminous objects.
What about objects like a chair, a
painting or a shoe? We see these whenlight from a luminous object (like theSun, a torch or an electric light) falls on
these and then travels towards our eye.
8.1 T RANSPARENT , O PAQUE  AND
TRANSLUCENT  OBJECTS
Recall our grouping objects as opaque,transparent or translucent, in Chapter
2. If we cannot see through an object atall, it is an opaque object. If you are
able to see clearly through an object, itis allowing light to pass through it and
is transparent . There are some objects
through which we can see, but not very
clearly. Such objects are known as
translucent .
Activity 1
Look around yourself and collect as
many objects as you can — an eraser,
plastic scale, pen, pencil, notebook,
single sheet of paper, tracing paper or apiece of cloth. Try to look at something
far away, through each of these objects
(Fig. 8.1). Is light from a far away objectable to travel to your eye, through any
of the objects?
Record your observations in a table
as shown in Table 8.1.
We see that a given object or material
could be transparent, translucent or
Fig. 8.1  Observing objects that do or do not
allow light to pass through them
Rationalised 2023-24
87 LIGHT, SHADOWS  AND REFLECTIONSTable 8.1
l a i r e t a m / t c e j b Ot c e j b o e h t h g u o r h t w e i V
/ y l l a i t r a p / y l l u f ( e l b i s s o p
) l l a t a t o n/ e u q a p o s i t c e j b O
/ t n e r a p s n a r t
t n e c u l s n a r t
l i c n e P
l l a b r e b b u R
r e p a p g n i t i r w f o t e e h S ? e r u s y r e v t o N
opaque depending on whether it allows
light to pass through it completely,
partially or not at all.
8.2 W HAT EXACTLY  ARE SHADOWS ?
Activity 2
Now, one by one hold each of the opaque
objects in the sunlight, slightly abovethe ground. What do you see on the
ground? You know that the dark patch
formed by each on the ground is due
to its shadow. Sometimes you can
identify the object by looking at itsshadow (Fig. 8.2).
Spread a sheet of paper on the
ground. Hold a familiar opaque objectat some height, so that its shadow is
formed on the sheet of paper on the
ground. Ask one of your friends to draw
the outline of the shadow while you areholding the object. Draw outlines of the
shadows of other objects in a similar
way.
Now, ask some other friends to
identify the objects from these outlinesof shadows. How many objects are theyable to identify correctly?
Do you observe your shadow in a
dark room or at night when there is nolight? Do you observe a shadow when
there is just a source of light and
nothing else, in a room? It seems weneed a source of light and an opaque
object, to see a shadow. Is there anything
else required?
Activity 3
This is an activity that you will have to
do in the dark. In the evening, go out in
an open ground with a few friends. Takea torch and a large sheet of cardboard
with you. Hold the torch close to the
ground and shine it upwards so that itslight falls on your friend's face. You now
have a source of light that is falling on
an opaque object. If there were no trees,building or any other object behind your
friend, would you see the shadow of
your friend's head? This does not mean
Fig. 8.2 Sometimes shadow of an object gives
an idea about its shape
Rationalised 2023-24
88 SCIENCEthat there is no shadow. After all, the
light from the torch is not able to pass
through his body to the other side.
Now, ask another friend to hold the
cardboard sheet behind your friend. Isthe shadow now seen on the cardboardsheet (Fig. 8.3)?
Thus, the shadow can be seen only
on a screen. The ground, walls of a room,
a building, or other such surfaces actas a screen for the shadows you observein everyday life.
Shadows give us some information
about shapes of objects. Sometimes,shadows can also mislead us about the
shape of the object. In Fig. 8.4 are a few
shadows that we can create with ourhands and make-believe that they are
shadows of different animals. Have fun!
Activity 4
Place a chair in the school ground on a
sunny day. What do you observe from
the shadow of the chair?
Does the shadow give an accurate
picture of the shape of the chair? If thechair is turned around a little, how does
the shape of the shadow change?
Take a thin notebook and look at its
shadow. Then, take a rectangular boxand look at its shadow. Do the two
shadows seem to have a similar shape?
Take flowers or other objects of
different colours and look at theirshadows. A red rose and a yellow rose,
for instance. Do the shadows lookdifferent in colour, when the colours of
the objects are different?
Take a long box and look at its
shadow on the ground. When you movethe box around, you may see that the
size of the shadow changes. When is theshadow of the box the shortest, when
the long side of the box is pointed
towards the Sun or when the short sideis pointing towards the Sun?
Let us use this long box, to prepare
a simple camera.Fig. 8.3  A shadow is obtained only on a screen
Fig. 8.4  Shadows of animals hidden in your hand
Rationalised 2023-24
89 LIGHT, SHADOWS  AND REFLECTIONS
8.3 A P INHOLE  CAMERA
You might think that we need a lot of
stuff to make a camera? Not really. If we
just wish to make a simple pin hole
camera.
Activity 5
Take two boxes of cardboard such thatone can slide into another with no gapin between them. Cut open one side of
each box. On the opposite face of the
larger box, make a small hole in themiddle [Fig. 8.5 (a)]. In the smaller box,
cut out from the middle a square with a
side of about 5 to 6 cm. Cover this opensquare in the box with tracing paper
(translucent screen) [Fig. 8.5 (b)]. Slide
the smaller box inside the larger onewith the hole, in such a way that the
side with the tracing paper is inside
[Fig. 8.5 (c)]. Your pinhole camera isready for use.
Holding the pinhole camera look
through the open face of the smallerbox. You should use a piece of black
cloth to cover your head and the pinhole
camera. Now, try to look at some distantobjects like a tree or a building through
the pinhole camera. Make sure that theobjects you wish to look at through your
pinhole camera are in bright sun shine.Move the smaller box forward orbackward till you get a picture on thetracing paper pasted at the other end.
Are these pinhole images different
from their shadows?
Look through your pinhole camera
at the vehicles and people moving onthe road in bright sunlight.
Do the pictures seen in the camera
show the colours of the objects on theother side? Are the images erect orupside down?  Surprise, surprise!
Let us now image the Sun, with our
pinhole camera. We need a slightlydifferent set up for this. We just need alarge sheet of cardboard with a smallpinhole in the middle. Hold the sheetup in the Sun and let its shadow fall ona clear area. Do you see a small circularimage of the Sun in the middle of theshadow of the cardboard sheet?
 Look at these pinhole images of the
Sun when an eclipse is visible from yourlocation. Adjust your pinhole andscreen to get a clear image before theeclipse is to occur. Look at the image as
the eclipse begins. You will notice a part
        (a)           (b)  (c)
Fig. 8.5 A sliding pin hole camera
Rationalised 2023-24
90 SCIENCE
of the image of the Sun gradually
becoming darker as the eclipse starts.Never ever look directly at the Sun .
That could be extremely harmful forthe eyes.
There is an interesting pinhole
camera in nature. Sometimes, when wepass under a tree covered with largenumber of leaves, we notice small
patches of sunlight under it (Fig. 8.6).
These circular images are, in fact,pinhole images of the Sun. The gaps
between the leaves, act as the pinholes.
These gaps are all kinds of irregularshapes, but, we can see circular images
of the Sun. Try to locate images of thePaheli has another thought. Surely,
all these results that we are seeing,
formation of shadows and pinhole
images are possible only if light moves
in a straight path?
Activity 6
Let us use a piece of a pipe or a long
rubber tube. Light a candle and fix it
on a table at one end of the room. Nowstanding at the other end of the room
look at the candle through the pipe
Fig. 8.6 A natural pinhole camera. Pinhole
images of the Sun under a tree!
Sun when an eclipse occurs next. Thatcould be so much fun!
Boojho has this thought. We saw
upside down images of people on theroad, with our pinhole camera. What
about the images of the Sun? Did wenotice them to be upside down or
anything like that?[Fig. 8.7 (a)]. Is the candle visible? Bend
the pipe a little while you are looking at
the candle [Fig. 8.7 (b)]. Is the candle
visible now? Turn the pipe a little to yourright or left. Can you see the candle now?
What do you conclude from this?This suggests that light travels along
a straight line, isn’t it? That is why,
when opaque objects obstruct it, a
shadow forms.Fig. 8.7  Looking through a pipe pointed
(a) towards and (b) a little away from a candle
(a)
(b)
Rationalised 2023-24
91 LIGHT, SHADOWS  AND REFLECTIONS
8.4 M IRRORS  AND REFLECTIONS
We all use mirrors at home. You look into
the mirror and see your own face inside
the mirror. What you see is a reflection
of your face in the mirror. We also see
reflections of other objects that are in
front of the mirror. Sometimes, we see
reflections of trees, buildings and otherobjects in the water of a pond or a lake.
Activity 7
This activity should be done at night orin a dark room. Ask one of your friends
to hold a mirror in his/her hand at one
corner of the room. Stand at anothercorner with a torch in your hand. Cover
the glass of torch with your fingers and
switch it on. Adjust your fingers with asmall gap between them so that you can
get a beam of light. Direct the beam of
the torch light onto the mirror that yourfriend is holding. Do you see a patch of
light on the other side (Fig. 8.8)? Now,adjust the direction of the torch so that
the patch of light falls on another friendstanding in the room.
This activity suggests that a mirror
changes the direction of light that fallson it.
Here is an activity that shows light
travelling along straight lines andgetting reflected from a mirror.
Activity 8
Fix a comb on one side of a large thermoCol sheet and fix a mirror on the otherside as shown in Fig. 8.9. Spread a dark
coloured sheet of paper between the
mirror and the comb. Keep this insunlight or send a beam of light from a
torch through the comb.
What do you observe? Do you get
a pattern similar to that shownin Fig. 8.9?
This activity gives us an idea of the
manner in which light travels and gets
reflected from a mirror.
Fig. 8.8  A mirror reflects a beam of light
Fig. 8.9  Light travelling in a straight line and
getting reflected from a mirror
Rationalised 2023-24
92 SCIENCE
Opaque objects do not allow light to pass through them.
Transparent objects allow light to pass through them and we can see through
these objects clearly.
Translucent objects allow light to pass through them partially.
Shadows are formed when an opaque object comes in the path of light.
Pinhole camera can be made with simple materials and can be used toimage the Sun and brightly lit objects.
Light travels in straight line.
Mirror reflection gives us clear images.
1. Rearrange the boxes given below to make a sentence that helps us understand
opaque objects.
OWS AKE OPAQ UE  O BJEC T  SM
SHAD
Rationalised 2023-24
93 LIGHT, SHADOWS  AND REFLECTIONS2. Classify the objects or materials given below as opaque, transparent or
translucent and luminous or non-luminous:
Air, water, a piece of rock, a sheet of aluminium, a mirror, a wooden board, a
sheet of polythene, a CD, smoke, a sheet of plane glass, fog, a piece of red hotiron, an umbrella, a lighted fluorescent tube, a wall, a sheet of carbon paper,the flame of a gas burner, a sheet of cardboard, a lighted torch, a sheet ofcellophane, a wire mesh, kerosene stove, sun, firefly, moon.
3. Can you think of creating a shape that would give a circular shadow if held in
one way and a rectangular shadow if held in another way?
4. In a completely dark room, if you hold up a mirror in front of you, will you see a
reflection of yourself in the mirror?
SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
1. Make a row of your friends — A, B, C and D, standing in a line. Let one friend
stand in front facing them and holding out a mirror towards them (Fig. 8.10).
Now, each person can tell who they are able to see in the Mirror. A,B, C, or D.If, A is able to see B in the mirror then, can B also see A in the mirror? Similarly,
for any two pairs amongst A,B,C, or D?
If A is not able to see B in the mirror, then, is B able to see A in the mirror?Similarly, for any two pairs amongst A,B,C, or D?
This activity tells us something about the way light travels and gets reflected
from mirrors. You will learn more about this in higher classes.
2.Daayan-Baayan —Take a comb in your right hand and bring it up to your hair
and look at yourself in the mirror. There is your familiar face, grinning at you 
  
Wait, try and find out which is the hand holding the comb, in your mirror
reflection. Is it the right hand or the left? You were holding it in your right hand,isn't it?
While a pinhole camera seems to be giving us upside down images, a mirror
seems to be turning right hand into left hand and the left into right hand. Wewill learn more about this in the higher classes.
Fig. 8.10
Rationalised 2023-24
94 SCIENCE
3.Magic Device —In the chapter on
symmetry in your Mathematics
textbook, you might have made aninteresting device Kaleidoscope, thatuses reflections. Now, let us makeanother device, a periscope, that usesreflections to see around corners! Askone of your freinds to stand in thecorridor just out side the entrance tothe classroom with a mirror in hand.Ask another friend also holding a mirror,to stand in the middle of classroom infront of the entrance. Now ask yourfriends to ajust their mirrors in such away that the image of object on the other side of the corridor becomes visible toyou while you are standing inside the class (Fig. 8.11).
You can make a simple periscope by placing two mirrors in a ‘Z’ shaped box as
shown in Fig. 8.12.
THINGS TO THINK ABOUT
1. Opaque objects cast shadows, isn't it? Now, if we hold a transparent object in
the Sun, do we see anything on the ground that gives us a hint that we areholding something in our hand?
2. We saw that changing colour of opaque objects does not change the colour of
their shadows. What happens if we place an opaque object in coloured light?You can cover the face of a torch with a coloured transparent paper to do this.(Did you ever notice the colours of evening shadows just as the Sun is setting?)
THINGS TO READ
Rudyard Kipling's " Just So Stories " and in particular, the story of " How the Leopard
got its spots " where he mentions stripy, speckly, patchy-blatchy shadows. Here
are a few lines from this story, that has a lot of shadows.
...after ever so many days, they saw a great, high, tall forest full of tree trunks
all 'sclusively speckled and sprottled and spottled, dotted and splashed andslashed and hatched and cross-hatched with shadows. (Say that quickly aloud,and you will see how very shadowy the forest must have been.)
'What is this,' said the Leopard, 'that is so 'sclusively dark, and yet so full of
little pieces of light?'
Fig. 8.11 Seeing around corners!
Mirror 1
Mirror 2Fig. 8.12 A periscope
Rationalised 2023-24
