58 SCIENCE6The Living Organisms —
Characteristics and Habitats
Paheli and Boojho went on
vacation to many places of
interest. One such trip took
them to the river Ganga in Rishikesh.
They climbed the mountains of the
Himalayas, where it was very cold. They
saw many kinds of trees on thesemountains — oaks, pines and deodars,
very different from the ones near their
home on the plains! In yet another trip,they travelled to Rajasthan and moved
on camels through the hot desert. They
collected different kinds of cactus plantsfrom this trip. Finally, they went on a
trip to Puri and visited the sea beach,
dotted with casuarina trees. Whilerecollecting all the fun that they had on
these trips, a thought struck them. All
these places were so different from oneanother, some were cold, some very hot
and dry, and some places so humid. And
yet all of them had many organisms
(living creatures) of various kinds.
They tried to think of a place on Earth
where there may not be any livingcreatures. Boojho thought of  places near
his home. Inside the house, he tried the
cupboards. He had thought that theremay not be any living organisms here,
but he found one tiny spider in the
cupboard. Outside the home too, theredid not seem to be any place, he could
think of, that did not have living creatures6.1 O RGANISMS  AND THE
SURROUNDINGS  WHERE THEY LIVE
Another thought that occurred to Paheli
and Boojho was about the kinds of livingorganisms that were present in different
locations that they had visited. The
deserts had camels, the mountains hadgoats and yak. Puri had some other
creatures — crabs on the beach and
such a variety of fish being caught bythe fishermen at the sea! And then,
there did seem to be some creatures like
ants that were present in all thesedifferent locations. The kinds of plants
found in each of these regions were so
different from the plants of the otherregions. What about the surroundingsof some kind or the other (Fig. 6.1). Paheli
started thinking and reading about far
away places. She read that people have
even found tiny living organisms in theopenings of volcanoes!
Fig. 6.1  Search for living organisms
Rationalised 2023-24
59 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSin these different regions? Were they
the same?
Activity 1
Let us start with a forest. Think of allthe plants, animals and objects that canbe found there. List them in Column 1
of Table 6.1. List things, animals and
plants, found in the other regions thatare also shown in the table. You can
collect the examples scattered through
this chapter to fill Table 6.1. Discussalso with your friends, parents and
teachers, to find more examples to fill
the tables. You can also consult manyinteresting books in libraries that talk
of animals, plants and minerals of
different regions.
Try and include many plants,
animals and objects, big and small, ineach of the columns in this table. Whatkind of objects will we find that may not
be animals or plants? Perhaps parts of
plants like dried leaves, or parts ofanimals, like bones. We may also find
different kinds of soils and pebbles.
Water in the oceans may have saltsdissolved in it as discussed in Chapter
3. There could be many more objects.
As we go through the chapter, keep
adding more examples to Table 6.1. Wewill discuss the table as we travel
through many more interesting places.
6.2 H ABITAT  AND ADAPTATION
What do you find from the plants and
animals listed in Activity 1? Did you find
a large variety in them? Look at what you
have entered in the column for the desertand the column for the sea in Table 6.1.
Did you list very different kind of
organisms in these two columns?
What are the surroundings like, in
these two regions?
In the sea, plants and animals are
surrounded by saline  (salty) water. Most
of them use  the air dissolved in water.
There is very little water available in
the desert. It is very hot in the day time
and very cold at night in the desert. The
animals and plants of the desert live onthe desert soil and breathe air from the
surroundings.
The sea and the desert are very
different surroundings and we find verydifferent kind of plants and animals in
these two regions, isn’t it? Let us lookat two very different kind of organisms
from the desert and the sea – a camel
and a fish. The body structure of a camelhelps it to survive in desert conditions.
Camels have long legs which help to
Table 6.1 Animals, plants and other objects found in different surroundings
t s e r o f e h t n I s n i a t n u o m n O t r e s e d e h t n I a e s e h t n I ? r e h t o y n A
Rationalised 2023-24
60 SCIENCEkeep their bodies away from the heat of
the sand (Fig. 6.2). They excrete smallamount of urine, their dung is dry and
they do not sweat. Since camels lose
very little water from their bodies, theycan live for many days without water.
Let us look at different kinds of fish.
Some of these are shown in Fig. 6.3.There are so many kinds of fish, but, do
you see that they all have something
common about their shape? All the onesshown here have the streamlined shape
that was discussed in Chapter 5. This
shape helps them move inside water.Fish have slippery scales on their bodies.
These scales protect the fish and also
help in easy movement through water.We discussed in Chapter 5, that fish
have flat fins and tails that help them
to change directions and keep their bodybalance in water. Gills present in the
fish help them to use oxygen dissolved
in water.
We see that the features of a fish help
it to live inside water and the features ofa camel help it to survive in a desert.We have taken only two examples
from a very wide variety of animals andplants that live on the Earth. In all this
variety of organisms, we will find that
they have certain features that helpthem live in the surroundings in which
they are normally found. The presence
of specific features or certain habits,which enable an organism to live
naturally in a place is called adaptation.
Adaptation of organisms differdepending on their place of dwelling.
That is why a fish cannot live out of
water and a camel cannot live in sea.
The place where organisms live is
called habitat. Habitat means a dwelling
place (a home). The habitat providesfood, water, air, shelter and other needs
to organisms.  Several kinds of plants
and animals live in the same habitat.
The plants and animals that live on
land are said to live in terrestrial
habitats. Some examples of terrestrial
habitats are forests, grasslands, deserts,
coastal and mountain regions. On the
other hand, the habitats of plants and
Fig. 6.2  Camels in their surroundings Fig. 6.3  Different kinds of fish
Rationalised 2023-24
61 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSanimals that live in water are called
aquatic habitats . Lakes, rivers and
oceans are some examples of aquatic
habitats. There are large variations
among terrestrial habitats like forests,grasslands, deserts, coastal and
mountain regions located in different
parts of the world.
The organisms, both plants and
animals, living in a habitat are its biotic
components. The non-living things suchas rocks, soil, air and water in
the habitat constitute its abiotic
components . Are sunlight and heat
biotic or abiotic components?
We know that some plants grow from
seeds. Let us look at some abiotic factors
and their effect on seeds as they grow
into young plants.
Activity 2
Recall Activity 7 in Chapter 4 — we made
sprouts from gram  and maize  seeds.
When the seed turned into a sprout, it
is said to have germinated. This is the
beginning of life of a new plant.
Collect some dry moong seeds. Keep
20-30 seeds aside and soak the rest inwater for a day. Divide the soaked seeds
into four parts. Keep one partcompletely submerged in water for 3-4
days. Do not disturb the dry seeds and
those submerged in water. Keep one partof soaked seeds in a sunny room and
another in a completely dark
region like a cupboard that does notallow any light to come in. Keep the last
part in very cold surroundings, say, in
a refrigerator or with ice around them.Rinse them and replace the water every
day. What do you notice, after a few
days? Do the seeds in all the fiveconditions germinate uniformly? Do you
find slower or no germination in any of
these?
Do you realise that abiotic factors like
air, water, light and heat are importantfor the growth of plants. In fact, abioticfactors are important for all living
organisms.
We find that organisms exist in very
cold as well as very hot climates, isn’tit? How do they manage to survive?
Adaptation is the method by whichorganisms get well adjusted to the
climate.There are some changes that can happen in an organism over a short period of
time to help them adjust to some changes in their surroundings. For instance,
if we live in the plains and suddenly go to high mountain regions, we may
experience difficulty in breathing and doing physical exercise for some days.
We need to breathe faster when we are on high mountains. After some days,
our body adjusts to the changed conditions on the high mountain. Such small
changes that take place in the body of a single organism over short periods, to
overcome small problems due to changes in the surroundings, are called
acclimatisation. These changes are different from the adaptations that take
place over thousands of years.
Rationalised 2023-24
62 SCIENCEAdaptation does not take place in a
short time because the abiotic factors of
a region also change very slowly. Those
organisms which cannot adapt to these
changes die, and only the adapted onessurvive. Organisms adapt to different
abiotic factors in different ways. This
results in a wide variety of organisms indifferent habitats.
Let us look at some habitats,
understood the abiotic factors and theadaptations of animals in these habitats.
6.3 A J OURNEY  THROUGH  DIFFERENT
HABITATS
Some Terrestrial Habitats
Deserts
We discussed the abiotic factors of a
desert and the adaptations in camels.What about other animals and plants
that are found in deserts? Do they
have the same kind of adaptations?
There are desert animals like rats
and snakes, which do not have long legsthat a camel has. To stay away from theintense heat during the day, they stay
in burrows deep in the sand (Fig 6.4).
These animals come out only during thenight, when it is cooler.
Fig. 6.5 shows some typical plants
that grow in a desert. How are theseadapted to the desert?
Activity 3
Bring a potted cactus and a leafy plant
to the classroom.  Tie polythene bags to
some parts of the two plants, as wasdone for Activity 4 in Chapter 4, where
we studied transpiration in plants.
Leave the potted plants in the sun and
observe after a few hours. What do yousee? Do you notice any difference in the
amount of water collected in the two
polythene bags?
Desert plants lose very little water
through transpiration. The leaves indesert plants are either absent, verysmall, or they are in the form of spines.
This helps in reducing loss of water from
the leaves through transpiration. Theleaf-like structure you see in a cactus
is, in fact, its stem (Fig. 6.5).
Photosynthesis in these plants isusually carried out by the stems. TheFig. 6.4 Desert animals in burrows
Fig. 6.5 Some typical plants that grow in desert
Rationalised 2023-24
63 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSstem is also covered with a thick waxy
layer, which helps to retain water in thetissues of cacti. Most desert plants have
roots that go very deep into the soil for
absorbing water.
Mountain regions
These habitats are normally very cold
and windy. In some areas, snowfall may
take place in winters.
There is a large variety of plants and
animals living in the mountain regions.Have you seen the kind of trees shown
in Fig. 6.6?also present on mountains. They mayhave different kind of adaptations tosurvive on the mountains.
Animals living in the mountain regions
are also adapted to the conditions there(Fig. 6.7). They have thick skin or fur to
protect them from cold. For example, yaks
have long hair to keep them warm. Snowleopard has thick fur on its body
Fig. 6.6  Trees of a mountain habitat
Fig. 6.7  (a) Snow
leopard, (b) yak
and (c) mountain
goat are adapted to
mountain habitats
If you live in a mountain region or
have visited one, you may have seen alarge number of such trees. But, haveyou ever noticed such trees naturally
growing in other regions?
How are these trees adapted to the
conditions prevailing in their habitat?These trees are normally cone shaped
and have sloping branches. The leavesof some of these trees are needle-like.
This helps the rainwater and snow to
slide off easily. There could be trees withshapes very different from these that are(a)
(b)
(c)
Rationalised 2023-24
64 SCIENCEincluding feet and toes. This protects its
feet from the cold when it walks on thesnow. The mountain goat has strong
hooves for running up the rocky slopes
of the mountains.
As we go up in the mountainous
regions, the surroundings change andwe see different kinds of adaptations atdifferent heights.
Grasslands
A lion lives in a forest or a grassland
and is a strong animal that can hunt
and kill animals like deer. It is lightbrown in colour. Look at the picture of
a lion and that of a deer (Fig. 6.8). How
are the eyes placed in the face for thesetwo animals? Are they in the front or
on the side of the face? Lions have long
claws in their front legs that can bewithdrawn inside the toes. Do the
features of a lion help it in any way tosurvive? It’s light brown colour helps it
to hide in dry grasslands when it huntsfor prey (animals to eat). The eyes in
front of the face allow it to have a correctidea about the location of its prey.
A  deer is another animal that lives in
forests and grasslands. It has strong teethfor chewing hard plant stems of theforest.  A  deer needs to know about the
presence of predators  ( animals like lion
that make it their prey ) in order to run
away from them and not become their
prey. It has long ears to  hear movements
of predators . The eyes on the side of its
head allow it to look in all directions for
danger.  The speed of the deer helps them
to run away from the predators.
There are many other features of a
lion, a deer or other animals and plantsthat help them to survive in theirhabitat.
Some Aquatic Habitats
OceansWe already discussed how fish are
adapted to live in the sea. Many other
sea animals have streamlined bodies tohelp them move easily in water. There
are some sea animals like squids and
octopus, which do not have thisstreamlined shape. They stay deeper in
the ocean, near the seabed and catch
any prey that moves towards them.However, when they move in water they
make their body shapes streamlined.
These animals have gills to help themuse oxygen dissolved in water.
There are some sea animals like
dolphins and whales that do not have
Fig. 6.8  (a) Lion and (b) deer
(a)
(b)
Rationalised 2023-24
65 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSgills. They breathe in air through
nostrils or blowholes that are locatedon the upper parts of their heads. This
allows them to breathe in air when they
swim near the surface of water. They canstay inside the water for a long time
without breathing. They come out to the
surface from time to time, to breathe inair. Did you ever see this interesting
activity of dolphins in television
programme or films on ocean life?
Ponds and lakes
Have you seen plants growing in ponds,
lakes, rivers and even some drains? Go
on a field trip to a nearby pond, if possible,
and try to observe the kinds of plants thatare seen there. Observe the leaves, stems
and roots of these plants.
Some of these plants have their roots
fixed in the soil below the water(Fig. 6.9). In terrestrial plants, roots
normally play a very important role in theabsorption of nutrients and water from
the soil. However, in aquatic plants, roots
are much reduced in size and their mainfunction is to hold the plant in place.
The stems of these plants are long,
hollow and light. The stems grow up tothe surface of water while the leaves and
flowers, float on the surface of water.
Some aquatic plants are submerged
in water. All parts of such plants areunder water. Some of these plants have
narrow and thin ribbon-like leaves.These can bend in the flowing water. In
some submerged plants, leaves are often
highly divided, through which the watercan easily flow without damaging them.
Frogs usually live in ponds. Frogs
can stay both inside the water as wellas move on land. They have strong back
legs that help them in leaping and
catching their prey.  They have webbedfeet which help them swim in water.
We have discussed only a few common
animals and plants compared to the widevariety that live in different habitats. You
may have also noticed the very wide
variety in plants around you, when youprepared a herbarium as part of the
suggested activities in Chapter 4.
Imagine the kind of variety that youcould see in a herbarium of leaves of
plants from all regions of the Earth!
6.4 C HARACTERISTICS  OF ORGANISMS
We went on a journey through differenthabitats and discussed many plants andFig. 6.9 Some aquatic plants float on water.
Some have their roots fixed in the soil at the
bottom. Some aquatic plants are
submerged in water.
Rationalised 2023-24
66 SCIENCEanimals. In Activity 1, we listed objects,
plants and animals found in differentsurroundings. Suppose we stop a while
and think which examples in our list
are living? Let us think of examples froma forest. Trees, creepers, small and big
animals, birds, snakes, insects, rocks,
soil, water, air, dry leaves, dead animals,mushrooms and moss may be only some
of the objects that are present in the
forest. Which of these are living?
Think of objects that you can see
around you at this moment and groupthem as living and non-living. In somecases, it is easy for us to know. For
example, we know that objects like chair
or table are not alive. Paheli was readingthis rhyme from Complete Nonsense
written by Edward Lear:Paheli and Boojho found the poem
very funny, because they knew that achair or a table is not alive and it cannot
talk or walk.
Chair, table, stone or a coin are not
alive. Similarly, we do know that we arealive and so are all the people of the
world. We also see animals around usthat are so full of life — dogs, cats,
monkeys, squirrels, insects and many
others.
How do we know that something is
living? Often, it is not so easy to decide.We are told that plants are living, butthey do not move like a dog or a pigeon.
On the other hand, a car or a bus can
move, still we consider them as non-living. Plants and animals appear to
grow in size with time. But then, at
times, clouds in the sky also seem togrow in size. Does it mean that clouds
are living? No! So, how does one
distinguish between living and non-living things? Do living things have
some common characteristics that
make them very different from thenon-living?
You are a wonderful example of a living
being. What characteristics do you have
which make you different from a non-
living thing? List a few of thesecharacteristics in your notebook. Look atyour list and mark those characteristics
that you have listed, which may also be
found in animals or plants.
Some of these characteristics are
perhaps common to all living things.
Said the Table to the Chair,
’You can hardly be aware,’How I suffer from the heat,’And from chilblains on my feet!’If we took a little walk,’We might have a little talk!’Pray let us take the air!’Said the Table to the Chair.Said the Chair to the table,’Now you know we are not able!’How foolishly you talk,’When you know we cannot walk!’
Said the Table with a sigh,’It can do no harm to try,’I’ve as many legs as you,’Why can’t we walk on two?’
Rationalised 2023-24
67 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATS
noticed pups grow
into adults. A chick
hatched from an
egg, grows intoa hen or a cock.(Fig. 6.11).
Plants also grow.
Look around youand see a few plantsof a particular type.
Some are very small
and young, someare bigger. Theymay all be in different stages of growth.
Look at the plants after a few days and
weeks. You may find that some of themhave grown in size. Growth seems to becommon to all living things.
Do you think, non-living things show
growth?
Do all organisms respire?
Can we live without breathing? Whenwe inhale, the air moves from outside tothe inside of our body. When we breathe
out, the air moves from inside our body
to outside. Breathing is part of a processcalled respiration . In respiration, some
of the oxygen of the air we breathe in, is
used by the body. We breathe out carbon
dioxide produced in this process.
The process of breathing in animals
like cows, buffaloes, dogs or cats is
similar to humans. Observe any one of
these animals while they are taking rest,and notice the movement of theirabdomen. This slow movement indicates
that they are breathing.
Do all organisms need food?
Earlier, we learnt that all living things
need food and how essential it is to
animals and to us. We have also learnt
that plants make their own food by theprocess of photosynthesis. Animals
depend on plants or other animals for
their food.
Food gives organisms the energy
needed for them to grow. Organisms alsoneed energy for other life processes thatgo on inside them.
Do all organisms show
growth?
Does the  kurta  you had four years back,
still fit you? You cannot wear it any
more, isn’t it? You must have growntaller during these years. You may not
realise it, but you are growing all the
time and in few more years you willbecome an adult. (Fig. 6.10).
Young ones of animals also grow
into adults. You would surely have
Fig. 6.10  A baby grows into an adultFig. 6.11  A chicken
grows into an adult
Rationalised 2023-24
68 SCIENCERespiration is necessary for all living
organisms. It is through respiration that
the body finally obtains energy from the
food it takes.
Some animals may have different
mechanisms for the exchange of gases,which is a part of the respiration process.
For example, earthworms breathethrough their skin.  Fish, we have learnt,
have gills for using oxygen dissolved in
water. The gills absorb oxygen from theair dissolved in water.
Do plants also respire?  Exchange of
gases in plants mainly takes placethrough leaves. The leaves take in air
through tiny pores in them and use the
oxygen. They give out carbon dioxide tothe air.
We learnt that in sunlight, plants
use carbon dioxide to produce food andgive out oxygen. The amount of oxygen
released in the process of food
preparation by plants is much morethan the oxygen they use in respiration.
Respiration in plants take s place day
and night.
Do all organisms respond to
stimuli?
How do you respond, if you suddenly
step on a sharp object like a thorn, whilewalking barefoot? How do you feel when
you see or think about your favourite
food? You suddenly move from a darkplace into bright sunlight. What
happens? Your eyes shut themselves
automatically for a moment tillthey adjust to the changed brightsurroundings. Your favourite food,bright light and a thorn, in the abovesituations are some examples of changes
in your surroundings. All of us respond
immediately to such changes. Changesin our surroundings that makes us
respond to them, are called stimuli.
Do other animals also respond to
stimuli? Observe the behaviour ofanimals, when food is served to them.
Do you find them suddenly becomingactive on seeing the food? When you
move towards a bird, what does it do?
Wild animals run away when brightlight is flashed towards them. Similarly,
cockroaches begin to move to their
hiding places if the light in the kitchenis switched on at night. Can you give
some more examples of responses of
animals to stimuli?
Do plants also respond to stimuli?
Flowers of some plants bloom only atnight. In some plants flowers close aftersunset. In some plants like Mimosa,
commonly known as ‘touch-me-not’,
leaves close or fold when someonetouches them. These are some examples
of responses of plants towards changes
in their surroundings.
Activity 4
Place a potted plant in a room a littleaway from a window through whichsunlight enters some time during the
day (Fig. 6.12). Continue watering the
plant for a few days. Does the plant growupright, like plants out in the open?
Note the direction in which it bends, if
Rationalised 2023-24
69 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSit is not growing upright. Do you think,
this may be in response to somestimulus?
All living things respond to changes
around them.
Living organisms and excretion
All organisms need food.  Not all the
food that is eaten is completely used,
only a part of it is utilised by the body.What happens to the rest? This has to
be removed from the body as wastes. Our
body produces some wastes in other lifeprocesses also. The process of getting
rid of wastes by organisms is known as
excretion .
Do plants also excrete? They do, but
not as seen in animals. The mechanismsin plants are a little different. Some plantsfind it possible to store the waste products
within their parts in a way that they do
not harm the plant as a whole. Someplants remove waste products as
secretions.
Excretion is another characteristic
common to all organisms.Animals reproduce their own kind.
The mode of reproduction may be
different, in different animals. Someanimals produce their young ones
through eggs.  Some animals give birth
to the young ones (Fig. 6.14).
Plants also reproduce. Like animals,
plants also differ in their mode ofreproduction. Many plants reproducethrough seeds. Plants produce seeds,
Fig. 6.13 (a) Birds lay eggs which after hatching
produce (b) young ones(a) (b)
Fig. 6.12 Plant respond to lightDo all organisms
reproduce their ownkind?
Have you ever seen nests of
some birds like pigeons?
Many birds lay their eggs in
the nest. Some of the eggs hatch and
young birds come out of them
(Fig. 6.13).
Fig. 6.14  Some animals which give birth to
their young ones
Rationalised 2023-24
70 SCIENCELiving things produce more of their
own kind through reproduction . It
takes place in many different ways, for
different organisms.
Do all organisms move?
In Chapter 6, we discussed the various
ways in which animals move. They movefrom one place to another and also show
other body movements.
What about plants? Do they also
move? Plants are generally anchored insoil so they do not move from one place
to another. However, various substances
like water, minerals and the foodsynthesised by them move from one part
of the plant to other. Have you noticed
any other kind of movement in plants?Opening or closing of flowers? Do you
recall how some plants show movement
in response to certain stimuli?
We also have some non-living
things moving, of course. A bus, car, asmall piece of paper, clouds and so on.Is there something different in these
movements from the movements of
living beings?
There is such a variety of living
organisms, but, all of them show somecommon characteristics, as we havediscussed. Yet another common
characteristic is that living beings die.
Because organisms die, particular typesof organisms can survive over thousands
of years only if they reproduce their own
kind. One single organism maydie without ever reproducing, but, the
type of organism can exist only if there
is reproduction.
Fig. 6.15  A  seed from a plant germinates into a
new plant
which can germinate and grow into newplants (Fig.6.15).
Some plants also reproduce through
parts other than seeds. For example, apart of a potato with a bud, grows into a
new plant (Fig. 6.16).
Plants also reproduce through
cuttings. Would you like to grow a plant
in this way yourself?
Activity 5
Take a cutting from a rose or a menhdi
plant. Fix it in the soil and water it
regularly. What do you observe, after a
few days?
It may not be easy to grow plants from
cuttings. Do not be disappointed if your
cutting does not grow. Talk to a gardener,if possible, on the care to be given to
cuttings to make them grow into plants.Fig. 6.16  A new plant grows from a bud of  potato
Rationalised 2023-24
71 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSn o i t a t p a d A
t a t i b a h c i t a u q A
t n e n o p m o c c i t o i B
n o i t e r c x E
h t w o r Gt a t i b a H
g n i v i L
n o i t c u d o r p e R
n o i t a r i p s e R
s u l u m i t SWe see that, all living things seem to
have some common characteristics.
They all need food, respire,  respond to
stimuli, reproduce, show movement,
grow and die.
Do we find some non-living things that
also show some of these characteristics?
Cars, bicycle, clocks and the water inthe river move. The moon moves in the
sky. A cloud grows in size right in front
of our eyes. Can such things be calledliving? We ask ourselves, do these objects
also show all the other characteristics
of living things?
In general, something that is living
may have all the characteristics that wehave discussed, while non-living thingsmay not show all these characteristics
at the same time.
Is this always true? Do we always find
that living things definitely show all thecharacteristics of the living that we have
discussed? Do we always find that non-living things may show only some of these
characteristics and never all of them?
To understand this a little better, let
us look at a specific example. Considerany seed, say, moong. Is it living? It canstay in a shop for months and not show
any growth or some of the othercharacteristics of life. However, we bring
the same seed and plant it in soil, water
it and it turns into a whole plant. Didthe seed — need food, did it excrete,
grow or reproduce when it was in the
shop for many months?
We see that there can be cases when
we cannot easily say that a thing has allthe characteristics that we have discussed,for it to be called living.
“What then is life?”
Push your hand deep inside a sack of
wheat. Do you find it is warm inside?There is some heat being produced
inside the sack of wheat. The seeds
respire and in that process give outsome heat.
We see that respiration is a process
that takes place in seeds even when
some of the other life processes may not
be very active.
It may not be very easy to answer
our question — “what then is life”?However, looking at all the diversity of
living beings around us, we canconclude that “life is beautiful” !
Rationalised 2023-24
72 SCIENCE
  The surroundings where plants and animals live, is called their habitat.
  Several kinds of plants and animals may share the same habitat.
  The presence of specific features and habits, which enable a plant or an
animal to live in a particular habitat, is called adaptation.
  There are many types of habitats, however, these may be broadly grouped
as terrestrial (on the land) and aquatic (in water).
  There is a wide variety of organisms present in different habitats.
  Plants, animals and microorganisms together constitute biotic
components.
  Rocks, soil, air, water, light and temperature are some of the abiotic
components of our surroundings.
  Living things have certain common characteristics — they need food,
they respire and, excrete, respond to their environment, reproduce, growand show movement.
1. What is a habitat?
2. How are cactus adapted to survive in a desert?
3. Fill up the blanks
(a) The presence of specific features, which enable a plant or an animal to live
in a particular habitat, is called                   .
(b) The habitats of the plants and animals that live on land are called
                  habitat.
(c) The habitats of plants and animals that live in water are called
                 habitat.
(d) Soil, water and air are the ———— factors of a habitat.
(e) Changes in our surroundings that make us respond to them, are
called                  .
4. Which of the things in the following list are nonliving?
Plough, Mushroom, Sewing machine, Radio, Boat, Water hyacinth, Earthworm
5. Give an example of a non-living thing, which shows any two characteristics of
living things.
6. Which of the non-living things listed below, were once part of a living thing?
Butter, Leather, Soil, Wool, Electric bulb, Cooking oil, Salt, Apple, Rubber
7. List the common characteristics of the living things.
8. Explain, why speed is important for survival in the grasslands for animals
that live there. (Hint: There are few trees or places for animals to hide in
grasslands habitats.)
Rationalised 2023-24
73 THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATSSUGGESTED PROJECTS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Many magazines and newspapers talk about possibility of life outside the
Earth. Read these articles and have a discussion in the class about what
could be defined as life outside Earth.
2. Visit a local zoo and find out what special arrangements are made for the
animals that have been brought there from different habitats.
3. Find out where are the habitats of the polar bear and the penguin. For each
animal, explain two ways in which it is well adapted to its habitat.
4. Find out which animals live in the foot-hills of the Himalayas. Find out if the
types and varieties of animals and plants changes as one goes higher intothe mountain regions of the Himalayas.
5. Make a habitat album. Try to obtain pictures of animals and plants that you
have listed in Activity 1 and paste these under different habitat sections inthe album. Draw the leaf shapes and structures for trees found in thesedifferent regions and include these in the album. In addition, draw thepatterns of branching found in trees of these different regions and includethese also in the album.
What is
its
name
and
habitat
Rationalised 2023-24
