74 SCIENCE
7Motion and
Measurement of Distances
There was a general discussion
among the children in Paheli and
Boojho's class about the places
they had visited during the summer
vacations. Someone had gone to their
native village by a train, then a bus, and
finally a bullock cart. One student had
travelled by an aeroplane. Another spent
many days of his holidays going on
fishing trips in his uncle's boat.
The teacher then asked them to read
newspaper articles that mentionedabout small wheeled vehicles that moved
on the soil of Mars and conducted
experiments. These vehicles were takenby spacecraft all the way to Mars!
Meanwhile, Paheli had been reading
stories about ancient India and wanted
to know how people travelled from one
place to another in earlier times.
7.1 S TORY OF TRANSPORT
Long ago people did not have any means
of transport. They used to move only on
foot and carry goods on their back. Later
on they began to use animals for
transportation.
For transport through water, routes,
boats were used from ancient times. Tobegin with, boats were simple logs of
wood in which a hollow cavity could be
made. Later, people learnt to put
together different pieces of wood andgive shapes to the boats. These shapesimitated the shapes of the animals living
in water. Recall our discussions of this
streamlined shape of fish in Chapters
5 and 6.
Invention of the wheel made a great
change in modes of transport. Thedesign of the wheel was improved overthousands of years.  Animals were used
to pull carts that moved on wheels.
Until the beginning of the 19th
century, people still depended onanimals, boats and ships to transport
them from place to place. The inventionof steam engine led to the development
of new means of transport. Railroads
were made for steam engine drivencarriages and wagons. Later came
Fig. 7.1 Some means of transportation
Rationalised 2023-24
75 MOTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCES
automobiles such as motor cars, trucks
and buses. Motorised boats and ships wereused as means of transport on water. The
early years of 1900 saw the development
of aeroplanes. These were later improvedto carry passengers and goods.  Electric
trains, monorail, supersonic aeroplanes
and spacecraft are some of thecontributions of the 20th century.
Fig. 7.1 shows some of the different
modes of transport. Place them in thecorrect order — from the earliest modes
of transport to the most recent.
Are there any of the early modes of
transport that are not in use today?
7.2 H OW WIDE IS THIS DESK?
How did people know how far they have
travelled?
How will you know whether you can
walk all the way to your school or whetheryou will need to take a bus or a rickshaw
to reach your school?  When you need to
purchase something, is it possible for youto walk to the market? How will you know
the answers to these questions?
It is often important to know how far
a place is, so that we can have an ideahow we are going to reach that place —
walk, take a bus or a train, a ship, anaeroplane or even a spacecraft!
Sometimes, there are objects whose
length or width we need to know.
In Paheli and Boojho's  classroom,
there are large desks which are to beshared by two students. Paheli andBoojho share one desk, but, frequently
end up objecting that the other is using
a larger share of the desk.On the teacher's suggestion, they
decided to measure the length of thedesk, make a mark exactly in the middle
of it and draw a line to separate the two
halves of the desk.
Both Paheli and Boojho are very fond
of playing gilli danda with their friends.
Boojho  brought a set of gilli  and danda
with him.
Here is how they tried to measure
the length of the desk using the danda
and the gilli (Fig. 7.2).
The desk seems to be having a
length equal to two danda lengths and
two lengths of the gilli. Drawing a line
in the middle of the desk leaves eachof them happy with a half of the deskequal to a danda and a gilli in length.
After a few days, the marked line gets
wiped out. Boojho now has a new setof gilli and danda  as he lost his old
one. Here is how, the length of thedesk seems to measure using the gilliand danda (Fig. 7.3).
Fig. 7.3  Measuring the length of the desk with a
different set of gilli and dandaFig. 7.2 Measuring the length of a desk with
gilli and danda
Rationalised 2023-24
76 SCIENCEHello! Now, when measured with the
new set of gilli and danda , the desk
length seems to be about two danda
lengths, one gilli length with a small
length still left out. This is less than one
gilli length. Now what?
What would you suggest Paheli and
Boojho do, to measure the length of thewhole desk? Can they use a cricket
wicket and bails to measure the length
or do you think that this might createthe similar problem?
One thing they could do is to take a
small length of string and mark two pointson it. This will be a string length. They
can measure the width of the desk in
string lengths (Fig. 7.4). How can theyuse the string to measure distances less
than the length of a string? They can fold
the string and mark it into 
1
2,  1
4 and 1
8
'string lengths'. Now, perhaps Paheli and
Boojho can measure the exact length of
the desk using the string.
You would say that they should use
the scale in their geometry box and solvetheir problem? Yes, Of course!
Boojho has been reading about the
way people used to measure distancesbefore such standard scales were made
and he has been trying to follow differentmethods of measuring distances.
There are so many occasions when we
come across a need to measure lengthsand distances. The tailor needs to measure
the length of the cloth to know if it is
enough to stitch a kurta . A carpenter
needs to measure the height and width
of a cupboard to know how much wood
he would need to make its door. Thefarmer needs to know the length and
breadth or the area of his land to know
how much seed he can sow and howmuch water would be needed for his crops.
Suppose, you are asked how tall you
are? You want to tell the length of astraight line from the top of your head
to the heel of your feet.
How long is this room?
How wide is this desk?
How far is it from Delhi to Lucknow?
How far away is the Moon from the
Earth?
All these questions have one thing
in common. They all concern distancebetween two places.  The two places may
be close enough, like the two ends of a
table or they may be far apart, likeJammu and Kanyakumari.
Let us do a few measurements to see
what exactly we need to do, when wemeasure distances or lengths.
7.3 S OME MEASUREMENTS
Activity 1
Work in groups and each of you do thisactivity one by one. Using your foot as a
 Fig. 7.4 Measuring the length of the desk with
string lengths
Rationalised 2023-24
77 MOTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCES
unit of length, measure the length and
breadth of the classroom. It is possiblethat while measuring these you may find
some part remains to be measured as it
is smaller than your foot. Use a stringto measure the length of a part of your
foot as you did before. Record your
observations in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1 Measuring length and
breadth of classroom
f o e m a N
t n e d u t se h t f o h t g n e L
m o o r s s a l ce h t f o h t d i W
m o o r s s a l c
Activity 2
Work in a group and each of you use
your handspan as a unit to measure
the width of a table or a desk in theclassroom (Fig. 7.5).with some known quantity. This knownfixed quantity is called a unit. The result
of a measurement is expressed in twoparts. One part is a number.  The otherpart is the unit of the measurement. For
example, if in Activity 1, the length of
the room is found to be 12 lengths ofyour foot, then 12 is the number and
'foot length' is the unit selected for the
measurement.
Now, study all the measurements
recorded in Table 7.1 and 7.2. Are allthe measurements for the room usingeverybody's foot, equal? Are everybody's
measurement, by handspan, of the
width of the table equal? Perhaps theresults could be different as the length
of your handspan and that of your
friends may not be the same. Similarly,the length of the foot may be slightly
different for all the students. Therefore,
when you tell your measurement usingyour handspan or length of foot  as a
unit to others, they will not be able to
understand how big the actual lengthis, unless they know the length of your
handspan or foot.
We see therefore, that some standard
units of measurement are needed, thatdo not change from person to person.
Fig. 7.5 Measuring the width of a table with a
handspan
Here too, you may find that you
need string lengths equal to your
handspan and then fractions of
this string length to make the
measurement. Record all observations
in Table 7.2.
We see that, measurement means the
comparison of an unknown quantityTable 7.2 Measuring width of a table
e h t d e r u s a e m o h W
? e l b a t e h t f o h t d i wf o r e b m u N
s n a p s d n a h
Rationalised 2023-24
78 SCIENCE7.4 S TANDARD  UNITS OF
MEASUREMENTS
In ancient times, the length of a foot,
the width of a finger, and the distance
of a step were commonly used as
different units of measurements.
The people of the Indus valley
civilisation must have used very good
measurements of length because we see
evidence in excavations of perfectly
geometrical constructions.
A cubit as the length from the elbow
to the finger tips was used in ancient
Egypt and was also accepted as a unit
of length in other parts of the world.
People also used the "foot" as a unit
of length in different parts of the world.
The length of the foot used varied
slightly from region to region.
People measured a “yard” of cloth by
the distance between the end of theoutstretched arm and their chin. The
Romans measured with their pace
or steps.
In ancient India, small length
measurements used were an angul
(finger) or a mutthi (fist). Even today, we
can see flower sellers using their forearm
as a unit of length for garlands in many
towns of India. Many such body parts
continue to be in use as unit of length,
when convenient.
However, everyone's body parts could
be of slightly different sizes. This musthave caused confusion in measurement.
In 1790, the French created a standardunit of measurement called the
metric system.
For the sake of uniformity, scientists
all over the world have accepted a set ofstandard units of measurement. The
system of units now used is known asthe International System of Units (SI
units). The SI unit of length is a metre.
A metre scale is shown in Fig. 7.6.  Alsoshown is the 15 cm scale in your
geometry box.
Each metre (m) is divided into 100
equal divisions, called centimetre (cm).Each centimetre has ten equal divisions,
called millimetre (mm). Thus,
1 m  = 100 cm
1 cm = 10 mm
For measuring large distances, metre
is not a convenient unit. We define a
larger unit of length. It is called
kilometre (km).
1 km = 1000 m
Now, we can repeat all our
measurement activities using a
standard scale and measure in SI units.
Before we do that, we do need to know
the correct way of measuring lengthsand distances.
7.5 C ORRECT  MEASUREMENT  OF
LENGTH
In our daily life we use various types ofmeasuring devices. We  use a metre scale
Fig.7.6  A metre scale and a 15 cm scale
Rationalised 2023-24
79 MOTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCESfor measuring length. A tailor uses a
tape, whereas a cloth merchant uses ametre rod. For measuring the length of
an object, you must choose a suitable
device. You cannot measure the girth ofa tree or the size of your chest using a
metre scale, for instance. Measuring
tape is more suitable for this. For smallmeasurements, such as the length of
your pencil, you can use a 15 cm scale
from your geometry box.
In taking measurement of a length,
we need to take care of the following:1. Place the scale in contact with the
object along its length as shown in
Fig. 7.7.
2. In some scales, the ends may be
broken. You may not be able to seethe zero mark clearly (Fig.7.8 (a)]. In
such cases, you should avoid takingmeasurements from the zero markof the scale. You can use any otherfull mark of the scale, say,
1.0 cm [Fig.7.8 (b)]. Then you must
subtract the reading of this markfrom the reading at the other end.
For example, in Fig.7.8 (b) the
reading at one end is 1.0 cm andat the other end it is 14.3 cm.
Therefore, the length of the object is
(14.3-1.0) cm = 13.3 cm.
Fig. 7.7  Method of placing the scale along the
length to be measured (a) correct and (b) incorrectFig. 7.8 (a) Incorrect and (b) correct method of
placing the scale with broken edge
 (a)(a)
(b)
3. Correct position of the eye is also
important for taking measurement.
Your eye must be exactly in front ofthe point where the measurement is
to be taken as shown in Fig.7.9.
Position ‘B’   is the correct positionof the eye. Note that from position
‘B’, the reading is 7.5 cm. From
positions ‘A’ and ‘C’, the readingsmay be different.
(b)
Rationalised 2023-24
80 SCIENCE
Activity 3
Measure the height of your classmate
using hand span and then by using ametre scale. For this, ask your classmate
to stand with his back against a wall.
Make a mark on the wall exactly abovehis head. Now, measure the distance
from the floor to this mark on the wall
with your handspan and then with ametre scale. Let all other students mea-
sure this length in a similar way. Record
all observations in Table 7.3.at the results in column 3 where themeasurements are done using astandard scale. The results may be close
to each other now, but, are they exactly
equal? If not, why do you think there isa difference? After all, everybody is using
the same scale and not different hand
spans. This could be due to small errorsin taking observations. In higher classes
we will learn about the importance of
knowing and handling such errors inmeasurement.
7.6 M EASURING  THE LENGTH  OF A
CURVED  LINE
We cannot measure the length of acurved line directly by using a metre
scale. We can use a thread  to measure
the length of a curved line.
Activity 4
Use a thread to measure the length of
the curved line AB (Fig. 7.10).  Put a
knot on the thread near one of its ends.Place this knot on the point A. Now,
place a small portion of the thread along
the line, keeping it taut using yourfingers and thumb. Hold the thread at
this end point with one hand. Using the
other hand, stretch a little more portionof the thread along the curved line. Go
Fig. 7.9  B is the proper position of the eye for
taking reading of the scale
Fig. 7.10 Measuring the length of a curved line
with a thread(A) (B) (C)
ABTable 7.3 Measurement of height
d e r u s a e m o h W
? t h g i e h e h tn i t h g i e H
s n a p s d n a hn i t h g i e H
m c
Study carefully results obtained by
different students. The results incolumn 2 may be different from each
other as the length of the handspan may
be different for different students. Look
Rationalised 2023-24
81 MOTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCES
on repeating this process till the other
end B of the curved line is reached.Make a mark on the thread where it
touches the end B. Now stretch the
thread along a metre scale. Measure the
length between the knot in the beginning
and the final mark on the thread. Thisgives the length of the curved line AB.
We see that we need a lot of care to
ensure that we are measuring distances
and lengths correctly. And, we need
some standard units and devices with
which we measure these distances and
can convey our results to others.
7.7 M OVING THINGS AROUND  US
Activity 5
Think of some objects you have seenrecently. List them in Table 7.4. These
may include a school bag, a mosquito,
a table, people sitting on chairs or peoplemoving about. The list may also have a
butterfly, a dog, a cow, your hands, a
small baby, a fish in water, a house, a
factory,  a piece of stone, a horse, a ball,
a bat, a moving train, a sewing machine,
a wall clock or the hands of a clock.
Make your list as large as you can.
Which of these are moving? Which
are at rest?How did you decide whether an object
is in motion or at rest?
You might have noticed that the bird
is not at the same place after some time,
while the table is at the same place. Onthis basis, you may have decided
whether an object is at rest or in motion.
Let us look at the motion of an ant
closely.
Activity 6
Select a place where you find ants.Spread a large sheet of white paper on
the ground and keep a little sugar on it.Ants are likely to be attracted to the
sugar and you will find many ants
crawling on the sheet of paper soon. Forany one ant, try and make a small mark
with a pencil near its position when it
has just crawled on to the sheet of paper(Fig. 7.11). Keep marking its position
after a few seconds as it moves along on
the sheet of paper. After some time,shake the paper free of the sugar and
the ants. Connect the different points
you have marked, with arrows, to showthe direction in which the ant was
Fig. 7.11  Motion of an antTable 7. 4 Objects at rest and in motion
t s e r t a s t c e j b O n o i t o m n i s t c e j b O
e s u o H d r i b g n i y l f A
e l b a Te h t f o d n a h s ' d n o c e S
k c o l c
k c o l C
Rationalised 2023-24
82 SCIENCE
Fig.7.12  Some examples of rectilinear motion
moving. Each point you have marked
shows where the ant moved to, in
intervals of a few seconds.
Motion seems to be some kind of a
change in the position of an object
with time, isn't it?
In Activity 5, where did you place
objects like a clock, a sewing machineor an electric fan in your grouping of
objects? Are these objects moving from
one place to other? No? Do you noticemovement in any of their parts? The
blades of the fan or the  hands of a
clock— how are they moving? Is their
movement similar to that of an ant or a
train?  Let us now look at some types of
motion to help us understand these
differences.
7.8 T YPES OF MOTION
You may have observed the motion of a
vehicle on a straight road, march-past
of soldiers in a parade or the falling
of a stone (Fig. 7.12). What kind
of motion is this?Sprinters in a
100-metre race
also move along a
straight track. Can
you think of moresuch examples fromyour surroundings?
(a)
(b)The motion of a point marked on the
blade of an electric fan or the hands of
a clock are examples of circular motion
(Fig. 7.13).
The electric fan or the clock by
themselves are not moving from oneplace to another. But, the blades of the In all these examples we see that the
objects move along a straight line. This
type of motion is called rectilinear
motion.
Activity 7
Take a stone, tie a thread to it and whirl
it with your hand. Observe the motionof the stone. We see that the stone moves
along a circular path.
In this motion, the distance of the
stone from your hand remains the same.This type of motion is called circular
motion.
Fig. 7.13 Some objects in circular motion
(a)
(c) (b)
Rationalised 2023-24
83 MOTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCES
object or a part of it repeats its motion after
a fixed interval of time (Fig. 7.14).
Did you observe a sewing machine
as a part of Activity 5? You must haveobserved that it remains at the same
location while any point on its wheelmoves with a circular motion. It also has
a needle that moves up and down
continuously, as long as the wheelrotates, isn't it? This needle is
undergoing a periodic motion.
Have you observed closely, the
motion of a ball along the ground? Here,Boojho is not sure why we say that
the distance of the stone from yourhand is the same when we whirl it
around. Can you help him
understand this? Rememberthat the stone is held
with a string.
fan rotate and so do
the hands of a
clock. If we mark a
point anywhere on
the blades of a fan or
on the hands of a
clock, the distance of
this point from the
centre of the fan or
the clock, will remain the same as
they rotate.
In some cases, an object repeats its
motion after some time. This type ofmotion is called periodic motion. Takethe stone tied with a string that you
used in Activity 7. Now, hold the string
in your hand and let the stone hangfrom it. This is a pendulum. Pull the
stone to one side with the other hand
and let it go. Now the pendulum is inmotion. It is an example of periodic
motion. A branch of a tree moving to
and fro, motion of a child on a swing,strings of a guitar or the membrane of
drums ( tabla ) being played, are all
examples of periodic motion where an
Fig. 7.14  Examples of periodic motion(a)
(b) (c)
(d) (e)
Rationalised 2023-24
84 SCIENCE
  Different modes of transport are used to go from one place to another.
  In ancient times, people used length of a foot, the width of a finger, the
distance of a step as units of measurement. This caused confusion anda need to develop a uniform system of measurement arose.
  Now, we use International System of Units ( SI units). This is  accepted
all over the world.
  Metre is the unit of length in SI unit.the ball is  rolling on the ground –
rotating as well as moving forward alongthe ground. Thus, the ball undergoes a
rectilinear motion as well as rotational
motion. Can you think of otherexamples where objects undergo
combinations of different types of
motion?
We did many measurement activities
and discussed some kinds of motion.We saw that motion is a change in theposition of an object with time.The change in this position canbe determined through distance
measurements. This allows us to know
how fast or slow a motion is. Themovement of a snail on the ground, a
butterfly flitting from flower to flower, a
river flowing, an aeroplane flying, moongoing around the Earth and blood
flowing inside our bodies show that there
is motion everywhere around us!
n o i t o m r a l u c r i C
e c n a t s i D
t n e m e r u s a e M
n o i t o M
n o i t o m c i d o i r e P
r a e n i l i t c e R
n o i t o m
s t i n u I S
f o s t i n U
t n e m e r u s a e m
Rationalised 2023-24
85 MOTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCES
SUGGESTED PROJECTS AND ACTIVITIES
1. Draw a map of your classroom. Roll a ball on the floor. In your map mark the
points where the ball started and where it stopped. Show also the path it
moved along. Did the ball move along a straight line?
2. Using string and a scale, let each student measure the length of his/her foot.
Prepare a bar graph of the foot length measurements that have been obtainedfor the whole class.1. Give two examples each, of modes of transport used on land, water and air.
2. Fill in the blanks:
(i) One metre is ______________ cm.(ii) Five kilometre is ______________ m.(iii)Motion of a child on a swing is ______________.
(iv)Motion of the needle of a sewing machine is ______________.
(v) Motion of wheel of a bicycle  is ______________.
3. Why can a pace or a footstep not be used as a standard unit of length?4. Arrange the following lengths in their increasing magnitude:
1 metre, 1 centimetre, 1 kilometre,1 millimetre.
5.    The height of a person is 1.65 m. Express it into cm and mm.6. The distance between Radha's home and her school is 3250 m. Express this
distance into km.
7. While measuring the length of a knitting needle, the reading of the scale at one
end is 3.0 cm and at the other end is 33.1 cm. What is the length of the needle?
8. Write the similarities and differences between the motion of a bicycle and a
ceiling fan that has been switched on.
9. Why would you not like to use a measuring tape made of an elastic material like
rubber to measure distance? What would be some of the problems you would
meet in telling someone about a distance you measured with such a tape?
10. Give two examples of periodic motion.  Motion in a straight line is called rectilinear motion.
  In circular motion an object moves such that its distance from a fixed
point remains the same.
  Motion that repeats itself after some period of time is called periodic motion.
Rationalised 2023-24
