SCIENCE
TEXTBOOK  FOR CLASS VI
Rationalised 2023-24
First Edition
March 2006 Phalguna 1927
ReprintedDecember 2006, February 2008,January 2009, November 2009,November 2010, January 2012,October 2013, December 2014,December 2015, January 2017,December 2017, December 2018,August 2019, January 2021,August 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
PD 850T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 65.00ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
 re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT CampusSri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet RoadHosdakere Halli ExtensionBanashankari III StageBengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust BuildingP .O.NavjivanAhmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446
CWC CampusOpp. Dhankal Bus StopPanihatiKolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454
CWC ComplexMaligaonGuwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
OfficerChief Business : Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge) : Bijnan Sutar
Production Assistant : Om Prakash
Cover
Shweta Rao
 Layout and Illustrations
Ashwani TyagiPrinted on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of EducationalResearch and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at 
Eye
Vision Printograph, 78, Mohkampur
Industrial Complex, Phase-I, Delhi Road,Meerut - 250 002 (U.P.)ISBN  81-7450-512-10652 – S CIENCE
Textbook for Class VI
Rationalised 2023-24
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks adeparture from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our systemand causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi andtextbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basicidea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharpboundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take ussignificantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlinedin the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and topursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with theinformation passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as thesole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sitesof learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if weperceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixedbody of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour inimplementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life atschool a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabusdesigners have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuringand reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for childpsychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhancethis endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities forcontemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiringhands-on experience.
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the Textbook Development Committee responsible for thisbook. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Science and
Mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Dr. N. Rathnasree for guiding the work of this committee. Several teacherscontributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principalsfor making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisationswhich have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material andpersonnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National MonitoringCommittee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of ProfessorMrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement inthe quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
December 2005 Research and Training
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN
THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducingthe content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning withcreative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken intoconsideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the
same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
• Difficulty level• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY  GROUP IN SCIENCE  AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor,  Chairman,  Advisory Committee Inter University Centre
for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
N. Rathnasree , Director,  Nehru Planetarium, Teen Murti House, New Delhi
MEMBERS
C. V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
D. Lahiry, Professor (Retd.),  DESM, NCERT, BL-89, Sector 2, Salt Lake, Kolkata
G. P. Pande, Uttarakhand Seva Nidhi, Paryavaran Shiksha Sansthan, Jakhan Devi, Almora,
Uttranchal
Harsh Kumari, Headmistress, CIE Experimental Basic School, Department of Education,
Delhi University, Delhi
J. S. Gill, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Jaishree Sikka, Assistant Professor,  Department of Botany, P.M.B. Gujarati Science College,
Indore
Kalyani Krishna, Reader, Department of Botany, Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi,
Dhaula Kuan, New DelhiLalita C. Kumar, Reader (Chemistry),  School of Science, Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
Neeraja Raghavan, Writer , Girl’s Education Plus, 302, East Mansion, 2 Hutchins Road,
Cooke Town, Bangalore
P.S. Yadava, Professor, Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University, Imphal
R. K. Parashar, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New DelhiRachna Garg, Lecturer, Central Institute of Educational Technology, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
Ranjana Agrawal, Principal Scientist and Head, Division of Forcasting Techniques,
Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, IARI Campus, Pusa, New Delhi
Sunila Masih, Teacher, Mitra GHS School, Suhagpur, P.O. Hoshangabad,  Madhya Pradesh
Sunita Malhotra, Professor of Chemistry,  School of Science, Indira Gandhi National Open
University (IGNOU), Maidan Garhi, New DelhiV. P. Srivastava, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
M
EMBER -COORDINATOR
R. Joshi, Lecturer (Selection Grade),   DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations
involved in the development of Science Textbook for Class VI. The Council
acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewingand refining the manuscripts of this book: Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal ,
Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari Nagar (Clock Tower), New Delhi; Mohini Bindra,Principal, Ramjas School, Pusa Road, New Delhi; D. K. Bedi, Principal, Apeejay
Senior Secondary School, Pitampura, Road No. 42, Sainik Vihar, New Delhi;Chand Vir Singh, Lecturer  (Biology ), GBSS School, Rajouri Garden (Main),
New Delhi; Neelam Monga, TGT (Science) , Kendriya Vidyalaya, Janakpuri,
New Delhi; Renuka Madan, TGT (Physics ), Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute,
Subroto Park, Delhi Cantt; P.K. Bhattacharya, Professor  (Retd) Consultant , DESM,
NCERT, New Delhi and Shukhvir Singh, Reader , DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
The Council gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following
academics for the editing and finalisation of this book: Vinod Raina, Member
National Monitoring Committee , Bharat Gyan Vigyan Samiti, Basement of YWA
Building, Hostel No. 2, G. Block, Saket, New Delhi; Professor Amitabha Mukherjee,Director , Centre for Science Education and Communication (CSEC), 10  Cavalry
Lane, University of Delhi, Delhi; Savithri Singh, Principal , AND College, University
of Delhi, Govindpuri, New Delhi; M. M. Kapoor, Professor,  CSEC, 10  Cavalry
Lane, University of Delhi, Delhi; R. M. Hallen, CSEC, 10 Cavalry Lane, Universityof Delhi, Delhi; D. A. Misra, Principal  (Retd), (As Nominee of CSEC) Directorate of
Education, B 203, Saraswati Vihar, New Delhi; Charu Varma, Lecturer ,
(As Nominee of CSEC), DIET, FU Block, Pitampura, Delhi. The  contributions ofRuchi Verma, Associate Professor, Pushplata Verma, Pramila Tanwar and AshishK. Srivastava, Assistant Professors , are acknowledged for being a part of the
review of this textbook.
The Council gratefully acknowledges the valuable feedback and suggestions
received from Professor  Arvind Kumar, Director,  Homi Bhabha Centre for Science
Education (HBCSE), TIFR, V. N. Purve Marg, Mankhurd, Mumbai and theacademics at HBCSE and CSEC at various stages of development of themanuscript of this textbook.
The dynamic leadership of Professor M. Chandra, Head, DESM, for providing
guidance in final editing of the manuscript and extending infrastructure facilitiesis highly acknowledged. Special thanks are due to Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor ;
and Vandana Singh, Consultant Editor for  going through the manuscript andsuggesting relevant changes.
The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor, Computer Station
Incharge,  Muhammad Aiyub Raza Misbahi, DTP Operator ; Rajesh Kumar
‘Manjhi’, Copy Editor ; Satish Kumar Mishra and Seema Yadav, Proofreaders .
The contribution of APC-office, administration of DESM, Publication
Department and Secretariat of NCERT is also acknowledged.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Rationalised 2023-24
The team of Paheli and Boojho will be
with you as you journey through this
textbook. They love to ask questions.
All kinds of questions come to their
minds and they collect them in their
sacks. Sometimes, they may share
some of these questions with you, as
you read through the chapters.
Paheli and Boojho are also on the
lookout for answers to many
questions — sometimes the questions
seem answered after they discuss
them with each other, sometimes
through discussions with other
classmates, teachers or their parents.
Answers to some questions do not
seem available even after all these. They might need to experiment on their own,
read books in the library, send questions to scientists. Just dig and dig and dig
into all possibilities and see if the questions can be answered. Perhaps, they
would carry some of the unanswered questions in their sacks to higher classes.
What will really thrill them, would be your adding questions to their sacks
or answer to their questions. Sometimes activities are suggested in the textbook,
results or findings of these by different groups of students would be of interest to
other students and teachers. You can complete the suggested activities and send
your results or findings to Paheli and Boojho. Do keep in mind that activities
that involve using blades, scissors or fire need to be done strictly under the care
of your teachers. Stick to the precautions given and then enjoy doing all the
suggested activities. Mind, the book will not be able to help you much, if the
activities are not completed!
You can send your feedback for Paheli and Boojho at.A NOTE FOR STUDENTS
 
To
The Head
Department of Education inScience and Mathematics,NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg,New Delhi 110016
Rationalised 2023-24
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Fundamental Duties
Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for
freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people
of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to
renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers,
wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his child or,
as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.
Part  IV A (Article  51 A)
Rationalised 2023-24
CONTENTS
FOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION  OF CONTENT  IN THE TEXTBOOKS v
A NOTE FOR STUDENTS ix
C H A P T E R    1
COMPONENTS  OF FOOD 1
C H A P T E R    2S
ORTING  MATERIALS  INTO GROUPS 11
C H A P T E R    3S
EPARATION  OF SUBSTANCES 20
C H A P T E R    4
GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTS 31
C H A P T E R    5B
ODY MOVEMENTS 45
C H A P T E R    6
THE LIVING ORGANISMS  — C HARACTERISTICS  AND HABITATS 58
C H A P T E R    7M
OTION AND MEASUREMENT  OF DISTANCES 74
C H A P T E R    8L
IGHT, SHADOWS  AND REFLECTIONS 86
C H A P T E R    9E
LECTRICITY  AND CIRCUITS 95
C H A P T E R    10F
UN WITH MAGNETS 104
C H A P T E R    11
AIR AROUND  US 115
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24
