The iron pillarCHAPTER 10
BUILDINGS, PAINTINGS AND BOOKS
Metallurgy
Ancient Indian metallurgists made major 
contributions to the metallurgical history of the world. Archaeological excavations have shown that the Harappans were master craftsmen and had knowledge of copper metallurgy. They even manufactured bronze by mixing copper and tin. While the Harappans belonged to the Bronze Age, their successors belonged to the Iron Age. India produced highly advanced types of iron-forged iron, wrought iron and cast iron.
The iron pillar
The iron pillar at 
Mehrauli, Delhi, is a remarkable example of the skill of Indian craftspersons. It is made of iron, 7.2m high, and weighs over 3 tonnes. It was made about 1500 years ago. We know the 
date because there is an inscription on the pillar mentioning a ruler named Chandra, who probably belonged to the Gupta dynasty (Chapter 9). What is amazing is the fact that the pillar has not rusted through the centuries.
Buildings in brick and stone
The skills of our crafts persons are also apparent in the buildings that have survived, such as stupas. The word stupa means a mound. While there 
are several kinds of stupas, round and tall, big and small, these have certain common features. Generally, there is a small box placed at the centre or heart of the stupa. This may contain bodily remains (such as teeth, bone or ashes) of the Marutasami and the iron pillar
Marutasami was so excited. His brother had propelled 
his wheelchair all along the dusty, stony path, past the Qutb Minar, and up the metal ramp. It had been tough, but now he was here, in front of the famous iron pillar. It was an unforgettable experience.
Chapter 9-10.indd   96 22 April 2022   02:53:33
Rationalised 2023-24
97 
buildings , paintings   
and books
T op : The Great Stupa at 
Sanchi, Madhya Pradesh.
Stupas like this one were built over several centuries. While the brick mound probably dates to the time of Ashoka (Chapter 7), the railings and gateways were added during the time of later rulers.Left : Sculpture from Amaravati. Look at the picture and describe what you see.
Buddha or his followers, or things 
they used, as well as precious 
stones, and coins. 
This box, known as a relic 
casket, was covered with earth. Later, a layer of mud brick or baked brick was added on top. And then, the dome like structure was sometimes covered with carved stone slabs. 
Often, a path, known as the 
pradakshina patha,  was laid 
around the stupa . This was 
surrounded with railings. Entrance to the path was through gateways. Devotees walked around the stupa, in a clockwise direction, as 
a mark of devotion.  Both railings 
and gateways were often decorated with sculpture. 
Find Amaravati on Map 7 (page 87). This was 
a place where a magnificent stupa once existed. 
Many of the stone carvings for decorating the stupa 
were made about 2000 years ago. 
Other buildings were hollowed out of rock to 
make artificial caves. Some of these were very 
elaborately decorated 
with sculptures and 
painted walls.  
Some of the 
earliest Hindu 
temples were also 
built at this time. Deities such as 
Vishnu, Shiva, 
and Durga were 
worshipped in  
these shrines. The 
Chapter 9-10.indd   97 22 April 2022   02:53:35
Rationalised 2023-24
 98
our pasts–iT op : An early temple at 
Bhitargaon, Uttar Pradesh.This was built about 1 500 years ago, and was made of baked brick 
and stone.  
T op Right : Monolithic temples at Mahabalipuram.Each of these was carved out of a huge, single piece of stone (that is why they are known as monoliths). While brick structures are built up by adding layers of bricks from the bottom upwards, in this case the stone cutters had to work from top downwards.List the problems that  stone cutters may have faced. 
Right : The Durga temple 
at Aihole, built about 1 400 years ago. 
most important part of the temple was the  room 
known as the garbhagriha , where the image of 
the chief deity was placed. It was  here that priests 
performed religious rituals, and devotees offered worship to the deity. 
Often, as at Bhitargaon, a tower, known as the 
shikhara, was built on top of the garbhagriha, to mark this out as a sacred place. Building shikharas  
required careful planning. Most temples also had a space known as the mandapa . It was a hall where 
people could assemble.    
Find Mahabalipuram and Aihole on Map 7  
(page 87). Some of the finest stone temples were built in these towns. Some of these are shown here.
Chapter 9-10.indd   98 22 April 2022   02:53:38
Rationalised 2023-24
Left : A  Jaina monastery 
from Orissa. 
This two storey building was carved out of the rock surface. Notice the entrance to the rooms. Jaina monks lived and meditated in these rooms. In what ways is the cave shown here different from the illustration on p.13?
Below : A sculpture from 
the National Museum, New Delhi.Can you see how some of the caves may have been hollowed out?
 How were stupas and temples built? 
There were several stages in building a stupa or 
a temple. Usually, kings or queens decided to 
build these as it was an expensive affair. First, good quality stone had to be found, quarried, and transported to the place that was often carefully chosen for the new building. Here, these rough blocks of stone had to be shaped and carved into pillars, and panels for walls, floors and ceilings. And then these had to be placed in precisely the right position. 
Kings and queens probably spent money from 
their treasury to pay the craftspersons who worked to build these splendid structures. Besides, when devotees came to visit the temple or the stupa, 
they often brought gifts, which were used to decorate the buildings. For example, an association of ivory workers paid for one of the beautiful gateways at Sanchi.  
Among the others who paid 
for decorations were merchants, farmers, garland makers,perfumers, smiths, and hundreds of men and women who are known only by their names which were inscribed on pillars, railings and walls. So when you get a 
Chapter 9-10.indd   99 22 April 2022   02:53:40
Rationalised 2023-24
 100
our pasts–i
Paintings from Ajanta.
Describe what you see in 
each of these paintings.chance to visit any of these buildings, 
remember how several hundreds of people probably worked to construct and decorate them. 
Make a diagram like the one on 
page 79 (Chapter 8) to show the stages in the building of a temple or stupa. 
Painting
Find Ajanta on Map 7 (page 87). This is a place where several caves were hollowed out of the hills over centuries. Most of these were monasteries for Buddhist monks, and some of them were decorated with paintings. Here are some examples. As the caves are dark inside, most of these paintings were done in the light of torches. The colours, which are vivid even after 
1500 years, were made of plants and minerals. 
The artists who created these splendid works of art remain unknown. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   100 26 May 2022   10:30:04
Rationalised 2023-24
101 
buildings , paintings   
and booksThe world of books
Some of the best-known epics were written during 
this period. Epics are grand, long compositions, 
about heroic men and women, and include stories 
about gods. A famous Tamil epic, the Silappadikaram, was 
composed by a poet named Ilango, around 1800 years ago. It is the story of a merchant named Kovalan, who lived in Puhar and fell in love with a courtesan named Madhavi, neglecting his wife Kannagi. Later, he and Kannagi left Puhar and went to Madurai, where he was wrongly accused of theft by the court jeweller of the Pandya king. The king sentenced Kovalan to death. Kannagi, who still loved him, was full of grief and anger at this injustice, and destroyed the entire city of Madurai. 
A description from the Silappadikaram
Here is how the poet describes Kannagi’s grief:
“O witness of my grief, you cannot console me. 
Is it right that your body, fairer than pure gold, lies 
unwashed here in the dust? Is it just that in the red glow of the twilight, your handsome chest, framed with a flower wreath, lies thrown down on the bare earth, while I remain alone, helpless and abandoned to despair? Is there no god? Is there no god in this country? Can there be a god in a land where the sword of the king is used for the murder of innocent strangers? Is there no god, no god?”
Another Tamil epic, the Manimekalai  was 
composed by Sattanar around 1400 years ago. This 
describes the story of the daughter of Kovalan and Madhavi. These beautiful compositions were lost to scholars for many centuries, till their manuscripts were rediscovered, about a hundred years ago. 
Other writers, such as Kalidasa, (about whom 
you read in Chapter 9) wrote in Sanskrit.  
Chapter 9-10.indd   101 22 April 2022   02:53:42
Rationalised 2023-24
 102
our pasts–iA verse from the ‘Meghaduta’
Here is a verse from Kalidasa’s best-known poem, the 
‘Meghaduta’, in which a monsoon cloud is imagined to be a messenger between lovers who are separated from one another. 
See how the poet describes the breeze that will 
carry the cloud northwards:
“A cool breeze, delightful as it is touched With the fragrance of the earthSwollen by your showers, Inhaled deeply by elephants, And causing the wild figs to ripen, Will blow gently as you go.”Do you think Kalidasa can be described as a lover 
of nature? 
Recording and preserving old stories
A number of Hindu religious stories that were in circulation earlier were written down around the same time. These include the Puranas . Purana  
literally means old. The Puranas contain stories about gods and goddesses, such as Vishnu, Shiva, Durga or Parvati. They also contain details on how they were to be worshipped. Besides, there are accounts about the creation of the world, and about kings.  
The Puranas were written in simple Sanskrit 
verse, and were meant to be heard by everybody. They were probably recited in temples by priests, and people came to listen to them.
Two Sanskrit epics, the Mahabharata  and 
Ramayana  had been popular for a very long time. 
Some of you may be familiar with these stories. The Mahabharata is about a war fought between 
the Kauravas and Pandavas, who were cousins. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   102 22 April 2022   02:53:42
Rationalised 2023-24
103 
buildings , paintings   
and booksThis was a war to gain control of the throne of the 
Kurus, and their capital, Hastinapura. The story itself was an old one, but was written down in the form in which we know it today, about 1500 years ago.  Both the Puranas  and the Mahabharata 
are supposed to have been compiled by Vyasa. The Bhagavad Gita , about which you learnt in  
Chapter 8, was also included in the Mahabharata. 
The Ramayana  is about Rama, a prince of Kosala, 
who was sent into exile. His wife Sita was abducted by the king of Lanka, named Ravana, and Rama had to fight a battle to get her back. He won and returned to Ayodhya, the capital of Kosala, after his victory. Like the Mahabharata , this was an old story 
that was now written down. Valmiki is recognised as the author of the Sanskrit Ramayana .
There are several versions (many of which are 
performed) of the Mahabharata  and the Ramayana , 
popular amongst people in different parts of the subcontinent. Find out about a version in your state.
Stories told by ordinary people
Ordinary people also told stories, composed poems and songs, sang, danced, and performed plays. Some of these are preserved in collections of stories, such as the Jatakas  and the Panchatantra , 
which were written down around this time. Stories from the Jatakas were often shown on the railings of stupas and in paintings in places such as Ajanta. Here is one such story:
Chapter 9-10.indd   103 22 April 2022   02:53:42
Rationalised 2023-24
The story of the monkey king
Once upon a time there was a great monkey king, 
who lived on the banks of the Ganga in the Himalayas, with 80,000 followers. They fed on the fruit of a special mango tree, which were very sweet. Such exquisite mangoes did not grow on the plains. One day, a ripe mango fell into the river and floated all the way to Varanasi. There the king of the city who was bathing in the river found it, and was amazed when he tasted it. He asked the foresters of his kingdom whether they could find the tree for him, and they led him all the way to the Himalayas. There, the king and his courtiers had their fill of mangoes. 
At night, the king discovered that the 
monkeys were also feasting on the 
fruit, and decided to kill them.  
However, the king of 
the monkeys worked 
out a plan to save his 
followers. He broke off 
branches of the mango 
tree, and tied them to 
form a ‘bridge’ across the river, and held on to one end till all 
his followers crossed 
over. Exhausted with 
the effort, he fell down 
and lay dying.  
The human king saw 
what had happened, and 
tried unsuccessfully to revive 
the monkey. When he died, the 
king mourned his death and paid 
him full respect.  
 This story is shown on a piece of sculpture found 
from a stupa at Bharhut in central India. Can you 
identify which parts of the story are shown in the 
sculpture?  
Why do you think these were chosen?  
Chapter 9-10.indd   104 22 April 2022   02:53:43
Rationalised 2023-24
105 
buildings , paintings   
and booksZero
While numerals had been used 
earlier, mathematicians in India now invented a special symbol for zero. This system of counting was adapted by the Arabs and then spread to Europe. It continues to be in use throughout the world. 
The Romans used a system 
of counting without using zero. Try and find out more about it.Ayurveda
Ayurveda is a well-known system of health science that was developed in ancient India. The two famous practitioners of Ayurveda in ancient India were Charaka (1st-2nd centuries C.E.) and Sushruta (c. 4th century C.E.) Charak Samhita, written by Charak is a remarkable book on medicine. In his treatise, Susruta Samhita , Sushruta 
speaks about elaborate surgical procedures.KEYWORDS
stupa 
temple 
painting 
epic 
story 
Purana 
science mathematicsWriting books on science
This was also the time when Aryabhata, a mathematician and astronomer, wrote a book in Sanskrit known as the Aryabhatiyam. He 
stated that day and night were caused by the rotation of the earth on its axis, even though it seems as if the sun is rising and setting everyday. He developed a scientific explanation for eclipses as well. He also found a way of calculating the circumference of a circle, which is nearly as accurate as the formula we use today. Varahamihira, Brahmagupta and  Bhaskaracharya were some other mathematicians and astronomers who made several discoveries. Try and find out more about them.
Imagine
You are sitting in a mandapa  of a temple. Describe the 
scene around you. 
 Let’s recall
1. Match the following
 Stupa  Place where the image  
  of the deity is installed
 Shikhara  Mound
Chapter 9-10.indd   105 22 April 2022   02:53:43
Rationalised 2023-24
 106
our pasts–i	beginning of stupa 
building (2300 years ago)
	Amaravati (2000 years 
ago) 
	Kalidasa (1 600 years 
ago) 
	Iron pillar, T emple at Bhitargaon, Paintings at Ajanta, Aryabhata 
(1 500 years ago)  
	Durga temple (1 400 
years ago)  SOME IMPORTANT
DATES Mandapa  Circular path around  
  the stupa
 Garbhagriha  Place in temples where  
  people could assemble
 Pradakshina patha  Tower
2. Fill in the blanks:
 (a) ___________ was a great astronomer.
 (b) Stories about gods and goddesses are found in  
the _______________
 (c) ____________ is recognised as the author of the 
Sanskrit Ramayana .
 (d) ___________ and __________are two Tamil epics. 
Let’s discuss 
3. Make a list of the chapters in which you find mention of 
metal working. What are the metals objects mentioned 
or shown in those chapters?  
4. Read the story on page 104. In what ways is the monkey 
king similar to or different from the kings you read about in Chapters 5 and 9? 
5.  Find out more and tell a story from one of the epics.  
Let’s do
6. List some steps that can be taken to make buildings 
and monuments accessible to differently abled people. 
7. Try and list as many uses of paper as you can. 
8. If you could visit any one of the places described in this 
chapter, which would you choose and why?
Chapter 9-10.indd   106 22 April 2022   02:53:43
Rationalised 2023-24
107 
buildings , paintings   
and booksA quick look at dates
Throughout the book, we have used approximate dates to give you 
a rough idea of when events/processes took place, using the year 
2000 as our starting point. Generally, the letter c., which stands for the Latin word circa,  meaning ‘approximate’ is used for such dates.
You will find dates written differently in other books that you 
may use.
 For instance, for the Palaeolithic period (Chapter 2), dates may be 
mentioned in terms of millions of years ago, written as mya
 The beginning of farming and herding at Mehrgarh (Chapter 2) 
dates to c. 6000 BC/ BCE
 The Harappan cities flourished between c. 2700 and 1900 BCE
 The Rigveda was composed between c. 1500 and 1000 BCE
 Mahajanapadas and cities developed in the Ganga valley and new 
ideas associated with the Upanishads , Jainism and Buddhism 
emerged  c. 500 BCE
 Alexander invaded the northwest c. 327–325 BCE
 Chandragupta Maurya became king c. 321 BCE
 Ashoka ruled between c. 272/268 to 231 BCE
 The composition of the Sangam texts, c. 300 BCE–300 CE
 The reign of Kanishka, c. 78–100 CE
 The establishment of the Gupta empire, c. 320 CE
 The compilation of the Jaina texts at the council at Valabhi, c. 
512/521 CE
 The rule of Harshavardhana, 606–647 CE
 Xuan Zang comes to India, 630–643 CE
 The rule of Pulakeshin II, 609–642 CE. 
In some cases, for example, the date from when Ashoka began to 
rule, you may find that more than one date is shown. This is because historians have not been able to agree on which is the correct date. Dates with question marks after them indicate that these are uncertain.
Chapter 9-10.indd   107 22 April 2022   02:53:43
Rationalised 2023-24
 108
our pasts–i
Chapter 9-10.indd   108 22 April 2022   02:53:46
Rationalised 2023-24
Notes
Chapter 9-10.indd   109 22 April 2022   02:53:46
Rationalised 2023-24
Notes
Chapter 9-10.indd   110 22 April 2022   02:53:46
Rationalised 2023-24
