 52
our pasts–i
Anagha’s school trip 
This was the first time Anagha was going on a school trip. 
They boarded the train from Pune (in Maharashtra) late at night, to go all the way to Varanasi (in Uttar Pradesh). Her mother, who came to see her off at the station, told the teacher: “Do tell the children about the Buddha, and take them to see Sarnath as well.”
The story of the Buddha
Siddhartha, also known as Gautama, the founder of Buddhism, was born about 2500 years ago. This was a time of rapid change in the lives of people. As you saw in Chapter 5, some kings in the mahajanapadas were growing more powerful. 
New cities were developing, and life was changing in the villages as well. Many thinkers were trying to understand these changes in society. They also wanted to try and find out the true meaning of life. 
The Buddha belonged to a small gana known as 
the Sakya gana, and was a kshatriya. When he was a young man, he left the comforts of his home in search of knowledge. He wandered for several years, meeting and holding discussions with other thinkers. He finally decided to find his own path to realisation, and meditated for days on end under a peepal  tree at Bodh Gaya in Bihar, where he 
attained enlightenment. After that, he was known as the Buddha  or the Wise One. He then went to 
Sarnath, near Varanasi, where he taught for the first time. He spent the rest of his life travelling on foot, going from place to place, teaching people, till he passed away at Kusinara. CHAPTER 6
NEW QUESTIONS AND IDEAS
Chapter 5-6.indd   52 22 April 2022   12:50:00
Rationalised 2023-24
53 
new questions   
and ideas
The Buddha taught that life is full of suffering 
and unhappiness. This is caused because we 
have cravings and desires (which often cannot be fulfilled). Sometimes, even if we get what we want, we are not satisfied, and want even more (or want other things). The Buddha described this as thirst or tanha. He taught that this constant 
craving could be removed by following moderation in everything. 
He also taught people to be kind, and to respect 
the lives of others, including animals. He believed that the results of our actions (called karma), 
whether good or bad, affect us both in this life and the next.  The Buddha taught in the language of  the ordinary people, Prakrit, 
so that everybody could understand his message. 
What was the language 
used to compose the Vedas? 
He also encouraged 
people to think for themselves rather than to simply accept what he said. Let us see how he did this.The stupa at Sarnath. 
This building, known as a stupa, was built to mark the place where the Buddha first taught his message. Y ou will learn more about stupas in Chapter 10.
Chapter 5-6.indd   53 22 April 2022   12:50:01
Rationalised 2023-24
 54
our pasts–iThe story of Kisagotami
Here is a famous story about the Buddha.
Once there was a woman named Kisagotami, whose son had died. She 
was so sad that she roamed through the streets of the city carrying the 
child with her, asking for help to bring him back to life. A kind man took her to the Buddha.
The Buddha said: “Bring me a handful of mustard seeds, and I will bring 
your child back to life.”
Kisagotami was overjoyed and started off at once, but the Buddha gently 
stopped her and added: “The seeds must come from the house of a family where nobody has died.”
Kisagotami went from door to door, but wherever she went, she found 
out that someone or the other — father, mother, sister, brother, husband, wife, child, uncle, aunt, grandfather, grandmother — had died. 
What was the Buddha trying to teach the sorrowing mother?
Upanishads
Around the time, various other 
thinkers also tried to find answers to philosophical questions. Some of them wanted to know about life after death, others wanted to know why sacrifices should be performed. Many of these thinkers felt that there was something permanent in the universe that would last even after death. They described this as the atman or the individual 
soul and the brahman or the 
universal soul. They believed that ultimately, both the atman and 
the brahman were one. 
Many of their ideas were 
recorded in the Upanishads. 
These were part of the later Vedic texts. Upanishad  literally 
means ‘approaching and sitting Six Schools of Indian Philosophy
Over centuries, India’s intellectual 
exploration of truth has come to be represented by six systems of philosophy. These are known as Vaishesika , Nyaya , Samkhya , Yoga, 
Purva Mimansa  and Vedanta or 
Uttara Mimansa. These six systems of philosophy are said to have been founded by sages Konada, Gotama, Kapila, Patanjali, Jaimini and Vyasa, respectively. These philosophies still guide scholarly discourse in the country. German-born British indologist, Friedrich Max Muller, has observed that the six systems of philosophy were developed over many generations with contributions made by individual thinkers. However, today, we find an underlying harmony in their understanding of truth, although they seem distinct from each other.
Chapter 5-6.indd   54 22 April 2022   12:50:01
Rationalised 2023-24
55 
new questions   
and ideasnear’ and the texts contain conversations between 
teachers and students. Often, ideas were presented through simple dialogues. 
Most Upanishadic thinkers were men, especially 
brahmins and rajas. Occasionally, there is mention of women thinkers, such as Gargi, Apala, Ghosha, and Maitreyi, who were famous for their learning, and participated in debates. Poor people rarely took part in these discussions. One famous exception was Satyakama Jabala, who was named after his mother, the slave woman Jabali. He had a deep desire to learn about reality, was accepted as a student by a brahmin teacher named Gautama, and became one of the best-known thinkers of the time. Many of the ideas of the Upanishads  were later 
developed by the famous thinker Shankaracharya, about whom you will read in Class VII. The wise beggar
Here is a dialogue based on a story from one of the most famous 
Upanishads , the Chhandogya Upanishad .
Shaunaka and Abhipratarin were two sages who worshipped the 
universal soul. 
Once, as they sat down to eat, a beggar came and asked for some food.“We cannot spare anything for you,” Shaunaka said.“Learned sirs, whom do you worship?” the beggar asked.“The universal soul,” Abhipratarin replied. “Ah! It means that you know that the universal soul fills the entire world.”“Yes, yes. We know that.” The sages nodded. “If the universal soul fills the whole world, it fills me too. Who am I, but 
a part of the world?” the beggar asked. 
“You speak the truth, O young brahmin.”“Then, O sages, by not giving me food, you are actually denying food 
to the universal soul.”
The sages realised the truth of what the beggar said, and shared their 
food with him. 
How did the beggar convince the sages to share their food with him?
Chapter 5-6.indd   55 26 May 2022   10:47:50
Rationalised 2023-24
 56
our pasts–iPanini, the grammarian
This was also the time when other scholars were 
at work. One of the most famous was Panini, who 
prepared a grammar for Sanskrit. He arranged the vowels and the consonants in a special order, and then used these to create formulae like those found in Algebra.  He used these to write down the rules of the language in short formulae (around 3000 of them!).
Jainism
The last and 24th tirthankara  of the Jainas, 
Vardhamana Mahavira, also spread his message 
around this time, i.e. 2500 years ago. He was a 
kshatriya prince of the Lichchhavis, a group that 
was a part of the Vajji sangha, about which you 
read in Chapter 5. At the age of thirty, he left home and went to live in a forest. For twelve years, he led a hard and lonely life, at the end of which he attained enlightenment. 
He taught a simple doctrine: men and women 
who wished to know the truth must leave their homes. They must follow very strictly the  rules of ahimsa, which means not hurting or killing living beings. “All beings,” said Mahavira “long to live. To all things life is dear.” Ordinary people could understand the teachings of Mahavira and his followers, because they used Prakrit. There were several forms of Prakrit, used in different parts of the country, and named after the regions in which they were used. For example, the Prakrit spoken in Magadha was known as Magadhi. 
Followers of Mahavira, who were known as 
Jainas , had to lead very simple lives, begging 
for food. They had to be absolutely honest, and were especially asked not to steal. Also, they had to observe celibacy. And men had to give up everything, including their clothes.
Chapter 5-6.indd   56 22 April 2022   12:50:01
Rationalised 2023-24
57 
new questions   
and ideasIt was very difficult for most men and women to 
follow these strict rules. Nevertheless, thousands 
left their homes to learn and teach this new way of life. Many more remained behind and supported those who became monks and nuns, providing them with food. 
Jainism was supported mainly by traders. 
Farmers, who had to kill insects to protect their crops, found it more difficult to follow the rules. Over hundreds of years, Jainism spread to different parts of north India, and to Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The teachings of Mahavira and his followers were transmitted orally for several centuries. They were written down in the form in which they are presently available at a place called Valabhi, in Gujarat, about 1500 years ago (see  
Map 7, page 87).
The sangha
Both the Mahavira and the Buddha felt that only those who left their homes could gain true knowledge. They arranged for them to stay together in the sangha , an association of those who left 
their homes. 
The rules made for the Buddhist sangha  were 
written down in a book called the Vinaya Pitaka. 
From this, we know that there were separate branches for men and women. All men could join the sangha . However, children had to take the 
permission of their parents and slaves that of their masters. Those who worked for the king had to take his permission and debtors that of creditors. Women had to take their husbands’ permission.
Men and women who joined the sangha  led 
simple lives. They meditated for most of the time, and went to cities and villages to beg for food during fixed hours. That is why they were known as bhikkhus (the Prakrit word for renouncer) and Jaina
The word 
Jaina comes 
from the term 
Jina, meaning 
conqueror. 
Why do you 
think the term 
Jina was used 
for Mahavira?
Chapter 5-6.indd   57 22 April 2022   12:50:01
Rationalised 2023-24
 58
our pasts–ibhikkhunis. They taught others, and helped one 
another. They also held meetings to settle any quarrels that took place within the sangha . 
Those who joined the sangha  included brahmins , 
kshatriyas, merchants, labourers, barbers, courtesans and slaves. Many of them wrote down the teachings of the Buddha. Some of them also composed beautiful poems, describing their life in the sangha. 
List at least two ways in which the sangha  
described in this lesson was different from the            one mentioned in Chapter 5. Were there any similarities?  
Viharas
To begin with, both Jaina and Buddhist monks went from place to place throughout the year, teaching people. The only time they stayed in one place was during the rainy season, when it was very difficult to travel. Then, their supporters built temporary shelters for them in gardens, or they lived in natural caves in hilly areas.
As time went on, many 
supporters of the bhikkhus 
and bhikkhunis, and they 
themselves, felt the need for more permanent shelters and so monasteries were built. These were known as viharas . The earliest 
viharas  were made of 
wood, and then of brick. Some were even in caves that were dug out in hills, especially in western India. A cave hollowed out in 
the hills.This is a cave in Karle, present-day Maharashtra. Bhikkhus and bhikkhunis lived and meditated in these shelters.
Chapter 5-6.indd   58 25 April 2022   02:09:40
Rationalised 2023-24
59 
new questions   
and ideasStages of life: Ashramas
Ashram means a stage of life.  
Four ashramas were recognised: brahmacharya, grihastha, vanaprastha  
and samnyasa.
Brahmanas , kshatriyas and vaishyas were expected to lead simple lives 
and study the Vedas during the early years of their life ( brahmacharya ).
Then they had to marry and live as householders (grihastha).
Then they had to live in the forest and meditate ( vanaprastha ).
Finally, they had to give up everything and become samnyasins.
The system of ashramas allowed a person to spend some parts of their 
lives in meditation.
In what way was the system of ashramas different from life in the  
Sangha ?A Buddhist text tells us:
Just as the waters of rivers lose their names and separateness when they flow into the mighty ocean, so are varna and ranks and family forgotten 
when the followers of the Buddha join the order of monks.
Very often, the land on which the vihara  was built 
was donated by a rich merchant or a landowner, or the king. The local people came with gifts of food, clothing and medicines for the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis. In return, they taught the people. Over the centuries, Buddhism spread to many parts of the subcontinent and beyond.
A new form of Buddhism, known as Mahayana 
Buddhism, now developed. This had two distinct features. Earlier, the Buddha’s presence was shown in sculpture by using certain signs. For instance, his attainment of enlightenment was shown by sculptures of the peepal tree. 
Now, statues of the Buddha were made. Many 
of these were made in Mathura, while others were made in Taxila. 
The second change was a belief in Bodhisattvas . 
These were supposed to be persons who had 
Chapter 5-6.indd   59 09 June 2022   05:26:14
Rationalised 2023-24
attained enlightenment. Once they attained 
enlightenment, they could live in complete isolation and meditate in peace. However, instead of doing that, they remained in the world to teach and help other people. The worship of Bodhisattvas became very popular, and spread throughout Central Asia, China, and later to Korea and Japan. 
Buddhism spread to western and southern 
India, where dozens of caves were hollowed out of hills for bhikkhus to live in.
Buddhism also spread south eastwards, to  
Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, and other parts of Southeast Asia including Indonesia. The older form of Buddhism, known as Theravada Buddhism was 
more popular in these areas.
Pilgrims
are men and women who undertake journeys to holy places in order to offer worship. The best-known of these are the Chinese Buddhist pilgrims, Fa Xian, who came to the subcontinent about 1600 years ago, Xuan Zang (who came around 1400 years ago) and I-Qing, who came about 50 years after Xuan Zang. They came to visit places associated with the life of the Buddha as well as famous monasteries.   
Each of these pilgrims left an account of his journey. They wrote of 
the dangers they encountered on their travels, which often took years, of the countries and the monasteries that they visited, and the books they carried back with them.
Nalanda – A unique centre of learning
Xuan Zang, and other pilgrims spent time studying in Nalanda (Bihar), the most famous Buddhist monastery of the period. This is how he describes it:
“The teachers are men of the highest ability and talent. They follow the 
teachings of the Buddha in all sincerity. The rules of the monastery are strict, and everyone has to follow them. Discussions are held throughout the day, and the old and the young mutually help one another. Learned men from different cities come here to settle their doubts.  The gatekeeper asks new entrants difficult questions. They are allowed to enter only after they have been able to answer these. Seven or eight out of every ten are not able to answer.” 
List the reasons why Xuan Zang wanted to study in Nalanda.
Chapter 5-6.indd   60 26 May 2022   10:49:19
Rationalised 2023-24
61 
new questions   
and ideasLet’s recall
1. Describe the ways in which the Buddha tried  
to spread his message to the people. 
2. Write whether true or false:
 (a) The Buddha encouraged animal sacrifices.
 (b) Sarnath is important because it was the place   
 where the Buddha taught for the first time. 
(c) The Buddha taught that karma  has no effect on  
 our lives.
(d) The Buddha attained enlightenment at Bodh   
 Gaya. 
(e) Upanishadic thinkers believed that the atman  
 and brahman were ultimately one.
3. What were the questions that Upanishadic thinkers 
wanted to answer?
4. What were the main teachings of the Mahavira?
Let’s discuss 
5. Why do you think Anagha’s mother wanted her  
to know the story of the Buddha?  
6. Do you think it would have been easy for slaves to join 
the sangha? Give reasons for your answer.
7. Discuss the reasons why the Chinese pilgrims came to 
India.
Let’s do 
8. Make a list of at least five ideas and questions mentioned 
in this lesson. Choose three from the list and discuss 
why you think they are important even today. 
9. Find out more about men and women who renounce the 
world today. Where do they live, what kinds of clothes do they wear, what do they eat? Why do they renounce the world? 
KEYWORDS
tanha 
Prakrit 
Upanishad 
atman 
brahman 
ahimsa 
Jaina 
sangha 
bhikkhu 
vihara 
ashramaImagine
You want to go to listen to one of the preachers who lived about 2500 years ago. Describe your conversation with your parents as you try to persuade them to let you go. 
SOME IMPORTANT
DATES
	Upanishadic thinkers, 
the Jaina teacher Mahavira and the Buddha (about 2500 
years ago)  
	Writing down of the Jaina texts (about 1 500 years ago)
Chapter 5-6.indd   61 22 April 2022   12:50:02
Rationalised 2023-24
