85 
new empires  and 
kingdomsCHAPTER 9
NEW EMPIRES AND KINGDOMS
Prashastis and what they tell us
Arvind was supposed to be acting as Samudragupta, 
a famous ruler of a dynasty known as the Guptas. We know about Samudragupta from a long inscription, inscribed on the Ashokan pillar at Allahabad. It was composed as a Kavya  by 
Harishena, who was a poet and a minister at the court of Samudragupta. 
This inscription is of a special kind known as 
a prashasti, a Sanskrit word, meaning ‘in praise 
of’. While prashastis were composed for some of the rulers you read about in Chapter 8, such as Gautamiputra Shri Satakarni, they became far more important from the time of the Guptas. 
Samudragupta’s prashasti
Let us see what Samudragupta’s prashasti tells us. 
The poet praised the king in glowing terms — as a warrior, as a king who won victories in battle, who was learned and the best of poets. He is also described as equal to the gods. The prashasti was 
composed in very long sentences. Here is a part of one such sentence: 
Arvind plays a king
Arvind had been chosen to act as a king in the school play. He had expected to march solemnly in splendid robes, to twirl his moustaches and wield the silver-paper wrapped sword with gusto. Imagine his surprise when he was told he would also have to sit and play a veena, and recite 
poetry! A musician-king? Who was that? he wondered. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   85 22 April 2022   02:53:28
Rationalised 2023-24
 86
our pasts–i
The king who played the 
veena. 
Some other qualities of Samudragupta are shown on coins such as this one, where he is shown playing the veena.Samudragupta the warrior
Whose body was most charming, being covered with 
the plenteous beauty of the marks of hundreds of scars caused by battle-axes, arrows, spikes, spears, barbed darts, swords, iron clubs, javelins, barbed arrows, long arrows and many other weapons.
What does this description tell you about the 
king? And also about how kings fought wars?
If you look at Map 7 (page 87), you will notice 
an area shaded in green. You will also find a series of red dots along the east coast. And you will find areas marked in purple and blue as well.
This map is based on the information provided 
in the prashasti . Harishena describes four different 
kinds of rulers, and tells us about Samudragupta’s policies towards them. 
1. The rulers of Aryavarta, the area shaded in green 
on the map. Here there were nine rulers who were uprooted, and their kingdoms were made a part of Samudragupta’s empire.
2. The rulers of Dakshinapatha. Here there were 
twelve rulers, some of whose capitals are marked with red dots on the map. They surrendered to Samudragupta after being defeated and he then allowed them to rule again. 
3. The inner circle of neighbouring states, including 
Assam, coastal Bengal, Nepal, and a number of gana sanghas  (remember Chapter 5) in the north-
west, marked in purple on the map. They brought tribute, followed his orders, and attended his court.
4. The rulers of the outlying areas, marked in blue on 
the map, perhaps the descendants of the Kushanas and Shakas, and the ruler of Sri Lanka, who submitted to him and offered daughters in  
marriage. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   86 22 April 2022   02:53:30
Rationalised 2023-24
87 
new empires  and 
kingdoms
MAP : 7 
Showing Important Cities and Kingdoms Find Prayaga (the old name for Allahabad), 
Ujjain and Pataliputra (Patna) on the map. These 
were important centres of the Gupta rulers.  
What was the difference between the way 
in which Samudragupta treated the rulers of Aryavarta and Dakshinapatha?
Can you suggest any reasons for this difference?
Chapter 9-10.indd   87 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
 88
our pasts–iVikram Samvat
The era beginning in the 
58 BCE is traditionally associated with Gupta king, Chandragupta II, who had founded it as a mark of victory over the Shakas and assumed the title of Vikramaditya.Genealogies 
Most prashastis  also mention the ancestors of 
the ruler. This one mentions Samudragupta’s 
great grandfather, grandfather, father and mother. His mother, Kumara devi, belonged to the Lichchhavi gana , while his father, 
Chandragupta, was the first ruler of the Gupta dynasty to adopt the grand title of maharaj-
adhiraja , a title that Samudragupta also used. 
His great grandfather and grandfather are mentioned simply as maha-rajas . It seems 
as if the family gradually rose to importance. 
Arrange these titles in order of importance: raja, 
maharaj-adhiraja, maha-raja. 
Samudragupta in turn figures in the genealogies 
(lists of ancestors) of later rulers of the dynasty, such as his son, Chandragupta II. We know about him from inscriptions and coins. He led an expedition to western India, where he overcame the last of the Shakas. According to later belief, his court was full of learned people. About some of them you will read in Chapter 10. 
Harshavardhana and the Harshacharita
While we can learn about the Gupta rulers from their inscriptions and coins, we can find out about some kings from biographies. Harshavardhana, who ruled nearly 1400 years ago, was one such ruler. His court poet, Banabhatta, wrote his biography, the Harshacharita, in Sanskrit. This 
gives us the genealogy of Harsha, and ends with his becoming king. Xuan Zang, about whom  
you read in Chapter 8, also spent a lot of time  
at Harsha’s court and left a detailed account of what he saw. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   88 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
89 
new empires  and 
kingdomsHarsha was not the eldest son of his father, 
but became king of Thanesar after both his father 
and elder brother died. His brother-in-law was the ruler of Kanauj (see Map 7) and he was killed by the ruler of Bengal. Harsha took over the kingdom of Kanauj, and then led an army against the ruler of Bengal. 
Although he was successful in the east, and 
conquered Magadha and probably Bengal also, he was not as successful elsewhere. He tried to cross the Narmada to march into the Deccan, but was stopped by a ruler belonging to the Chalukya dynasty, Pulakeshin II.
Look at political map of India and list the 
present-day states which Harshavardhana passed through when he went (a) to Bengal and (b) up to the Narmada. 
The Pallavas, Chalukyas and Pulakeshin’s prashasti
The Pallavas and Chalukyas were the most important ruling dynasties in south India during this period. The kingdom of the Pallavas spread from the region around their capital, Kanchipuram, to the Kaveri delta, while that of the Chalukyas was centred around the Raichur Doab, between the rivers Krishna and Tungabhadra. 
Aihole,  the capital of the Chalukyas,  was an 
important trading centre (see Map 7). It developed as a religious centre, with a number of temples. The Pallavas and Chalukyas frequently raided one another’s lands, especially attacking the capital cities, which were prosperous towns. 
The best-known Chalukya ruler was Pulakeshin 
II. We know about him from a prashasti, composed 
by his court poet Ravikirti. This tells us about his ancestors, who are traced back through four generations from father to son. Pulakeshin evidently got the kingdom from his uncle.
Chapter 9-10.indd   89 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
 90
our pasts–iAccording to Ravikirti, he led expeditions along 
both the west and the east coasts. Besides, he 
checked the advance of Harsha. There is an interesting play of words in the poem. Harsha means happiness. The poet says that after this defeat, Harsha was no longer Harsha! Pulakeshin also attacked the Pallava king, who took shelter behind the walls of Kanchipuram. 
But the Chalukya victory was short-lived. 
Ultimately, both the Pallavas and the Chalukyas gave way to new rulers belonging to the Rashtrakuta and Chola dynasties, about which you will study in Class VII. 
Who were the other rulers who tried to control 
the coasts and why? (Hint: see Chapter 8).
How were these kingdoms administered?
As in the case of earlier kings, land revenue remained important for these rulers, and the village remained the basic unit of administration. There were some new developments as well. Kings adopted a number of steps to win the support of men who were powerful, either economically, or socially, or because of their political and military strength. For instance:
• Some important administrative posts were now 
hereditary. This means that sons succeeded fathers to these posts. For example, the poet Harishena was a maha-danda-nayaka , or chief judicial officer, like 
his father. 
• Sometimes, one person held many offices. For 
instance, besides being a maha-danda-nayaka , 
Harishena was a kumar-amatya, meaning an 
important minister, and a sandhi-vigrahika, 
meaning a minister of war and peace. 
• Besides, important men probably had a say in 
local administration. These included the nagara-
shreshthi or chief banker or merchant of the city, 
Chapter 9-10.indd   90 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
91 
new empires  and 
kingdomsthe sarthavaha or leader of the merchant caravans, 
the prathama-kulika or the chief craftsman, and the head of the kayasthas or scribes. 
These policies were reasonably effective, but 
sooner or later, some of these powerful men grew 
strong enough to set up independent kingdoms. 
What do you think may have been the advantages 
and disadvantages of having hereditary officers? 
A new kind of army
Like earlier rulers, some of these kings maintained a well-organised army, with elephants, chariots, cavalry and foot soldiers. Besides, there were military leaders who provided the king with troops whenever he needed them. They were not paid regular salaries. Instead, some of them received grants of land. They collected revenue from the land and used this to maintain soldiers and horses, and provide equipment for warfare. These men were known as samantas. Whenever the ruler was 
weak, samantas tried to become independent. 
Assemblies in the southern kingdoms 
The inscriptions of the Pallavas mention a number of local assemblies. These included the sabha, which was an assembly of brahmin  
landowners. This assembly functioned through sub-committees, which looked after irrigation, agricultural operations, making roads, local temples, etc. 
The ur was a village assembly found in areas 
where the landowners were not brahmins. And the nagaram was an organisation of merchants. It is likely that these assemblies were controlled by rich and powerful landowners and merchants. Many of these local assemblies continued to function for centuries. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   91 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
 92
our pasts–iOrdinary people in the kingdoms
We can catch an occasional glimpse of the lives of 
ordinary people from plays, and other accounts. Let us look at some of these.
Kalidasa is known for his plays depicting life in 
the king’s court. An interesting feature about these plays is that the king and most brahmins  are shown 
as speaking Sanskrit, while women and men other than the king and brahmins use Prakrit. His most 
famous play, ‘Abhijnana Shakuntalam’, is the story of the love between a king named Dushyanta and a young woman named Shakuntala. We find an interesting description of the plight of a poor fisherman in this play.
A fisherman finds a ring
A fisherman found a precious ring, which the king 
had given to Shakuntala, but which had been accidentally swallowed by a fish. When he went to the palace with it, the gatemen accused him of theft, and the chief police officer was rather rude. However, the king was happy when he saw the ring and sent a reward for the fisherman. Then, the police officer and the gatemen decided to take a share of the reward, and went along with the fisherman to have a drink.
Do you think that if a poor man finds something 
and reports this to the police he would be treated 
like this today?   
Name a famous man who taught in Prakrit and 
a king who issued inscriptions in Prakrit (hint: see Chapters 6 and 7)
Chapter 9-10.indd   92 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
93 
new empires  and 
kingdomsThe Chinese pilgrim Fa Xian noticed the plight 
of those who were treated as untouchables by the 
high and mighty. They were expected to live on the outskirts of the city. He writes: “If such a man enters a town or a market place, he strikes a piece of wood, in order to keep himself separate; people, hearing this sound, know what it means and avoid touching him or brushing against him.”
And Banabhatta provides us with a vivid picture 
of the king’s army on the move:
The king’s army
The king travelled with an enormous amount of equipment. Apart from weapons, there were things of daily use such as pots, pans, furniture, golden footstools, food, including animals such as goat, deer, rabbits, vegetables, spices, carried on carts or loaded on to pack animals such as camels and elephants. This huge army was accompanied by musicians beating drums, and others playing horns 
and trumpets.  
Villagers had to provide hospitality along the 
way. They came with gifts of curds, gur and flowers, 
and provided fodder for the animals. They also tried to meet the king, and place their complaints and 
petitions before him.  
The army left a trail of destruction behind. 
Elephants often trampled down the huts of villagers, and the oxen yoked to the caravans of merchants ran away, scared by the tumult.
As Banabhatta says: “The whole world was 
swallowed up in dust.”  
Make a list of all the things that were carried 
with the army. 
What did the villagers bring for the king?  
Chapter 9-10.indd   93 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
 94
our pasts–iKEYWORDS 
prashasti 
Aryavarta 
Dakshinapatha 
genealogy 
hereditary officer 
samanta 
assembly 
nagaramImagine
Harshavardhana’s army will visit your village next week. 
Your parents are preparing for the visit. Describe what they say and do. 
Let’s recall 
1. State whether true or false:
 (a) Harishena composed a prashasti  in praise of   
 Gautamiputra Shri Satakarni. 
 (b) The rulers of Aryavarta brought tribute for   
 Samudragupta. 
 (c) There were twelve rulers in Dakshinapatha . 
 (d) Taxila and Madurai were important centres   
 under the control of the Gupta rulers. 
 (e) Aihole was the capital of the Pallavas. 
 (f) Local assemblies functioned f or several centuries  
 in south India. 
2. Mention three authors who wrote about Harshavardhana.
3. What changes do you find in the army at this time?
4. What were the new administrative arrangements during 
this period? 
Let’s discuss
5. What do you think Arvind would have to do if he was 
acting as Samudragupta? 
6. Do you think ordinary people would have read and 
understood the prashastis? Give reasons for your 
answer. 
Chapter 9-10.indd   94 22 April 2022   02:53:31
Rationalised 2023-24
95 
new empires  and 
kingdomsSOME IMPORTANT
DATES
	Beginning of the Gupta 
dynasty (about 1 700 
years ago)  
	The rule of Harshavardhana (about 1 400 years ago)Let’s do
7. If you had to make a genealogy for yourself, who are the 
people you would include in it? How many generations 
would you like to show? Make a chart and fill it. 
8. How do you think wars affect the lives of ordinary 
people today? 
Chapter 9-10.indd   95 22 April 2022   02:53:32
Rationalised 2023-24
