31 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTS4 Getting to Know Plants
Go outside and observe all the
plants around you (Fig. 4.1).
Do you see that some plants
are small, some very big,  while some
are just patches of green on
the soil? Some have green
leaves, while some others havereddish ones. Some have huge
red flowers, some have tiny
blue ones, while some havenone. We do see a  variety of
plants existing all around us
— near our homes, in theschool ground, on the way to
Fig. 4.2 Parts of a plantthe school, in the parks and gardens,isn’t it?
Let us  get to know the different
parts of any plant. This will help us
understand the differences between
plants of different kinds.  Can you label
the stem, branch, root, leaf, flower and
fruit of the plant shown in Fig.4.1?
Colour the parts of the plant.
4.1 H ERBS, SHRUBS  AND TREES
Activity 1
Look closely at the stem and branches
of:1. Plants much smaller than you.
2. Plants that are about your size, and
3. Plants which are much taller than
you.
Feel their stem and try to bend them
gently to see if they are tender or hard.Fig. 4.1  A Nature walk!
Flower
Shoot
system
RootsystemFruit
BudStem
Leaf
Node
Internode
Primaryroot
Secondaryroot{
Rationalised 2023-24
32 SCIENCE
Table 4.1 Categories of plants
Take care that the stem does not break.
Hug the tall plants to see how thick their
stems are!
We also need to  notice from where the
branches grow in some plants — close tothe ground or higher up on the stem.
We will now group all the plants we
observed, in Table 4.1. Some examplesare shown. You can fill the Columns 1,2 and 3 for many more plants.
Fill Column 4 later after studying
the section.
 Based on these characters most
plants can be classified into threecategories: herbs, shrubs  and trees .  An
example of each is shown in Fig.4.3.
Fig.4.3  (a) Herb, (b) shrub and (c) treeSuggestion:  Student can work in
groups of 4–5 so that a minimumnumber of plants are harmed/damaged.
You may also use weeds with soft
stems for the activities. Do you knowwhat weeds are? In crop fields, lawns,
or in pots, often some unwanted
plants or weeds start growing. Haveyou seen farmers removing these
weeds from their fields?
(b)(a)
(c)
Rationalised 2023-24
33 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTSPlants with green and tender stems
are called herbs. They are usually short
and may not have many branches
[Fig.4.3 (a)].
Some plants develop branches near
the base of stem. The stem is hard but
not very thick. Such plants are called
shrubs [Fig.4.3(b)].
Some plants are very tall and have
hard and thick stem. The stems have
branches in the upper part, much above
the ground. Such plants are called trees[Fig.4.3(c)].
Based on the above characteristics
can you now classify the plants listedby you and complete column 4 inTable 4.1?two trees, shrubs, herbs or creepers
growing in your house or school.
4.2 S TEM
Observe closely the stems of differentplants around you. Note down different
Plants with weak stems that cannot
stand upright but spread on the ground
are called creepers (Fig.4.4) , while those
that take support and climb up are called
climbers  (Fig.4.5). These are different
from the herbs, shrubs and trees.
Perhaps there are some plants in
your school or at home that you take
care of. Write down the names of anystructures/parts borne by
the stem. Compare you
observations with the that of
your friends. What do youfind? Stems bear leaves,
branches, buds, flowers
and fruits.
Activity 2
We would require a glass, water, red/
blue ink and a soft stem. Pour water to
fill one-third of the glass. Add a fewdrops of red/blue ink to the water. Cut
the base of the stem and put it in the
glass as shown in Fig.4.6.
Observe the set-up. Does the colour
appear in the stem? You will find thatthe colour rises in the stem. If this iskept for a longer period, the colour
Fig. 4.5  Climbers
Paheli wonders what kind of stem — the
money plant, beanstalk, gourd plants and
grape vines have. Do observe some of theseplants. How are these different from a herb,
a shrub or a tree? Why do you
think some of them need support
to climb upwards?
Fig. 4.4 Creepers
Rationalised 2023-24
34 SCIENCELet us get to know the leaf better by
taking its impression! If you thought
that leaves cannot sign, here is an
activity which will make you think again.
Activity 3
Put a leaf under a white sheet of paper
or a sheet in your notebook. Hold it inplace as shown in Fig. 4.9. Hold your
pencil tip sideways and rub it on the
portion of the paper having the leaf belowit. Did you get an impression with some
lines in it? Are they similar to those on
the leaf?
These lines on
the leaf are calledveins. Do you see
a prominent line
in the middle of the
leaf? This is called
the midrib.  The
design made by
veins in a leaf is
called the leaf venation . If this design is
net-like on both sides of midrib, the
venation is  reticulate [Fig. 4.10 (a)]. In
the leaves of grass you might have seenthat the veins are parallel to one another.This is parallel venation [(Fig. 4.10 (b)].
Observe the venation in as many leavesas you can without removing them fromthe plant. Draw the pattern and writeFig. 4.9 Taking an
impression of a leaf
4.3 L EAF
Observe the leaves of some plants
around you and draw them in your
notebook. Are all the leaves of same size,shape and colour?
How are leaves attached to the stem?
The part of leaf by which it is attachedto the stem is called petiole. The broad,
green part of the leaf is called lamina
(Fig. 4.8). Can you identify these partsof the leaves in plants around you? Do
all the leaves have petioles?Fig. 4.7 (a) Water moves up the stem and
      reaches leaves
(b) Enlarged view of open end of stem(a) (b)
Fig. 4.6  Stem in a glass with coloured water
appears in the veins of leaves also. How
do you think the colour reached there?
From this activity, we see that the
stem helps in upward movement ofwater. The water and minerals go to
leaves and other plant parts attached to
the stem.Fig. 4.8  A leaf
Lamina
PetioleStem
Rationalised 2023-24
35 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTSnames of some plants having reticulate
and parallel venation.
Shall we now find out some of the
functions of a leaf?
Activity 4
We will require a herb, two transparentpolythene bags and thread.
Do this activity during day time on a
sunny day. Use a healthy, well wateredplant that has been growing in the sun.Enclose a leafy branch of the  plant in a
polythene cover and tie up its mouth as
shown in Fig. 4.11. Tie up the mouth of
another empty polythene cover and keep
it also in the sun.
After a few hours, observe the inner
surface of the covers. What do you see?
Are there any droplets of water? How do
you think they got there? [Don’t forgetto remove the polythene bag after the
activity!]
Water comes out of leaves in the form
of vapour by a process calledtranspiration . Plants release a lot of water
into the air through this process.
Why did we tie a cover around the
leaves? Would we have seen the water
evaporate if we had not tied a polytheneFig. 4.10 Leaf venation (a) reticulate and
(b) parallel
(a) (b)
Fig. 4.11  What does the leaf do?Midrib Veins Transparent
polythene
cover/bag
Fig. 4.12  What does the leaf contain?Green
leaf Iodine
solution
Blue
Black
coloured
leafcover? What makes the water appear on
the polythene bag? In Chapter 5, we
noticed water changing into different
forms in some of our activities. Can youthink of these and name the process that
makes water drops appear on the
polythene cover?
Leaves also have another function.
Let us study this.
Activity 5
We would require a leaf, spirit, a beaker,test tube, burner, water, a watch glass
and iodine solution for this activity.
Take a leaf in a test tube and pour
spirit to completely immerse the leaf.
Rationalised 2023-24
36 SCIENCEWhich part of the plant is in the soil?
Let us learn more about this part from
the following activities.
Activity 6
You would requiretwo pots, some soil,
khurpi (for digging), blade or a pair of
scissors and water. This activity is to be
done in groups of 4-5 students.
Select two plants of the same kind
from an open ground and dig them outwith roots. Take care that their roots donot break. Plant one of them in pot A
[Fig. 4.14 (a)]. Cut off the roots from theNow, place the test tube in a beaker half
filled with water. Heat the beaker till allthe green colour from the leaf comes out
into the spirit in the test tube. Take out
the leaf carefully and wash it in water.
Place it on a watch glass and pour some
iodine solution over it (Fig. 4.12).
What do you observe? Compare your
observations with those done  inChapter 1, when you tested food for
presence of different nutrients. Does this
mean that the leaf has starch in it?
In Chapter 1, we saw that a slice of
raw potato also shows the presence ofstarch. Potatoes get this starch from
their leaves and store it. Leaves prepare
their food in the presence of sunlight
and a green coloured substance present
in them. For this, they also use water
and carbon dioxide. This process is
called photosynthesis . Oxygen is given
out in this process. The food prepared
by leaves ultimately gets stored in
different parts of plant.
We have seen that the stem supplies
leaf with water. The leaf uses the waterto make food. The leaves also lose water
through transpiration. How do the stem
and leaves get water? That is where the
roots come in!
4.4  R OOT
Look at  Fig. 4.13. Who do you think is
watering their plant correctly, Paheli orBoojho? Why?Note:  Since the activity involves the
use of spirit and heating, it is advised
that it is demonstrated by the teacher
in the class.
Fig. 4.13  Watering the plants
Fig. 4.14    (a) Plant with roots, and
       (b) without roots(a) (b)A B
Rationalised 2023-24
37 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTSother plant and plant it in pot B [Fig.
4.14 (b)]. Water them regularly. Observethe plants after a week. Are both plants
healthy?
Both the plants are watered
regularly, but, one is without roots, isn’tit? Does this activity help you
understand an important function of theroot?
Let us do an activity to study another
function of root.
Activity 7
We   would require seeds of gram andmaize, cotton wool, katori (bowl) and
some water.
Take two katoris (bowl). Place some
wet cotton in them. Put 3 or 4 seeds of
gram in one and maize in the other.
Keep the cotton wet by sprinkling
water every day, until the sprouts have
grown into young plants. After a week
try to separate the young plants from
the cotton (Fig. 4.15).holding the plant firmly to the soil. Theyanchor the plant to the soil.
You have seen that there are different
kinds of stems and leaves. Do the rootsalso show a variety? Let us find out.
Activity 8
Study Fig. 4.16 (a) and (b) carefully.Now, look at the roots of the gram plants
you have pulled out from the cotton in
the previous activity. Do they look likethe roots shown in Fig. 4.16 (a) or those
in Fig. 4.16 (b)? How about the roots of
Was it easy to separate the cotton
from the roots? Why?
In Activity 6, we could not pull out
the plants from the soil, right? We dug
them out. This is because roots help inmaize plant? Write ‘gram’ or ‘maize’ inthe blank spaces in the figure after
matching the roots with the figures.
In what way are the roots of gram
and maize similar? In what way are theydifferent?  There seem to be two different
types of roots, isn’t it? Are there alsoother types of roots? Let us find out.
Activity 9
Go to an open ground where many wild
plants are growing. Dig out a few, wash
the soil off the roots and observe them.
Do you find that all of them have either
the kind of roots shown in Fig. 4.17 (a)
or as in Fig. 4.17 (b)?
Fig. 4.15  Young plants grown on cotton
Fig 4.16 (a) Roots of_______________
(b) Roots of_______________(a) (b)
Rationalised 2023-24
38 SCIENCE
For roots of the kind shown in
Fig.4.17 (a),  the main root is called tap
root and the smaller roots are called
lateral roots . Plants with roots as shown
in Fig. 4.17 (b) do not have a main root.
All roots seem similar and these are
called fibrous roots .
Separate the plants you have
collected into two groups. In group (a)put those that have tap roots and in
group (b) those that have fibrous roots.
Look at the leaves of the plants in Group
(a). What kind of venation do they have?
What kind of venation do you see for
plants of Group (b)?
Do you notice that leaf venation and
the type of roots in a plant are related ina very interesting way? In Table 4.2, can
you match the type of leaf venation and
the type of roots for some plants you have
studied in all the activities so far?
Table 4.2 Types of roots and types of
leaf venation
f o e m a N
t n a l pf a e l f o e p y T
n o i t a n e vf o e p y T
s t o o r
We have learnt that roots absorb
water and minerals from the soil and
the stem conducts these to leaves andother parts of the plant. The leaves
prepare food. This food travels through
the stem and is stored in different partsof plant. We eat some of these as roots—
like carrot, radish, sweet potato, turnip
and tapioca. We also eat many otherparts of a plant where food is stored.
Do you agree that stem is like a street
with two way traffic (Fig. 4.18)? Writethe name of material that goes up in
the stem and that which comes down.Fig. 4.17  (a) Taproot and (b) fibrous roots(a) (b)
Boojho has a brilliant idea! If he
wants to know what kind of roots a
plant has, he need not pull it out.
He just has to look at its leaves!
 Fig. 4.18 . Stem as two-way traffic street
In the next section, we will study
about the structure of a flower.
Rationalised 2023-24
39 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTSare called sepals . Take a flower and
observe its petals and sepals. Now,
answer the following questions:
How many sepals does it have?
Are they joined together?
What are the colours of the petals
and the sepals?
How many petals does the flower have?Are they joined to one another or are
they separate?
Do the flowers with joint sepals have
petals that are separate or are they also
joined together?
Fill the table based on the
observations of the whole class(Table 4.3). Add observations to thistable, from a field trip to a locality where
there are plants with flowers. Fill the
last two columns later.
To see the inner parts of the flower
clearly, you have to cut it open, if itspetals are joined. For example, in datura
and other bell-shaped flowers, the petals
have to be cut lengthwise and spreadWhich colour did you use for the
flower in Fig. 4.19 (c)? Are all flowers
colourful?  Have you ever seen flowers
on grass, wheat, maize, mango or
guava? Are those brightly coloured?
Let us study a few flowers.These are the petals. Different flowers
have petals of different colours.
Where do you think the petals are in a
closed bud? Which is the most prominentpart in a bud? Did you see that this partis made of small leaf-like st ructures? They
Fig 4.19 Rose:  (a) A leafless branch
(b) A branch with leaves(c) A branch with leaves and flowers
(a) (b) (c)4.5  F LOWER
You are shown three branches of a rose
in Fig 4.19 (a), (b) and (c). Which one
will help you best to recognise the plant?
When choosing flowers to study, avoidusing marigold, chrysanthemum or
sunflower. You will learn in higherclasses that they are not single flowers,
but groups of flowers.
Activity 10
We would require one bud and two fresh
flowers each, of any of the following–
datura , china rose, mustard, brinjal,
lady’s finger, gulmohur. Also a blade, a
glass slide or a sheet of paper, a
magnifying glass and water.
Observe Fig. 4.20 carefully. Look at
the prominent parts of the open flower.
Fig. 4.20  Bud and flowerSepalsPetals
Rationalised 2023-24
40 SCIENCE
Fig. 4.21  A bell-shaped flower
out so that the inner parts can be seen
clearly (Fig. 4.21).
Remove the sepals and petals to see
the other parts. Study the Fig. 4.22
carefully, compare your flower with the
illustration and identify the stamens  and
pistil  in your flower.
Look at Fig 4.23 carefully. It shows
different kinds of stamens present indifferent flowers. Can you recognise the
two parts of the stamens  in your flower?
How many stamens are there in your
flower? Draw one stamen and label
its parts.The innermost part
of flower is called thepistil . If you cannot see
it completely, remove
the remaining stamens.
Identify the parts of the
pistil with the help ofFig. 4.24.
Draw a neat,
labelled diagram of thepistil of your flower.Table 4.3 Observations on flowers
f o e m a N
/ r e w o l f
t n a l pr e b m u N
r u o l o c d n a
s l a p e s f or e b m u N
r u o l o c d n a
s l a t e p f oe h t e r A
d e n i o j s l a p e s
? e t a r a p e s r oe h t e r A
d e n i o j s l a t e p
? e t a r a p e s r oe r a – s n e m a t S
r o e e r f y e h t
s l a t e p o t d e n i o j– l i t s i P
/ t n e s e r P
t n e s b a
e s o Ry n a M
) ? r u o l o C () ? r u o l o C ( 5 e t a r a p e S e e r F t n e s e r P
Fig. 4.23  Parts of a stamenAnther
Filament
Fig. 4.24  Parts
of a pistilStigma
Ovary
Activity 11
Let us now study the structure of ovary
(Fig. 4.24).  It is the  lowermost and
swollen part of the pistil.  We will cut this
part to study what is inside! Look at Fig.
4.25 (a) and (b) carefully to understand
how to cut the ovary of a flower.Style
Fig. 4.22  Parts of a flowerStamens PistilAnthers
Rationalised 2023-24
41 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTSCut the ovary in two different ways
as shown in Fig. 4.25. To prevent them
from drying, put a drop of water on
each of the two pieces of the ovary, you
have cut.Observe the inner parts of the ovary
using a lens (Fig. 4.26). Do you see some
small bead like structures inside theovary? They are called ovules . Draw and
label the inner parts of the ovary in yournotebook.
Try to find out the names of as many
flowers as you can by asking thegardener or any other person.Remember, not to pluck more flowers
than you need. Based on what you have
filled in Table 4.3, answer the followingquestions.
Do all flowers have sepals, petals,
stamens and pistils? Are there flowers thatdo not have one or more of these? Are
there flowers which have parts other than
these?
Did you find any flower which has
no difference between sepals and petals?
Did you find any flower in which the
number of stamens is different from the
number of petals?
Do you now agree that the structure
of the flower is not always the same?The number of sepals, petals, stamens
and pistils may also be different indifferent flowers. Some of these parts
may even be absent at times!
We have studied some features and
functions of leaves, stems and roots.We studied the structure of different
flowers. We will learn about the functionof flowers in higher classes. We will also
learn about fruits in higher classes.
Ovules
Fig. 4.26 Inner structure of an ovary
(a) longitudinal cut, (b) transverse cutFig. 4.25 Cutting an ovary (a) longitudinal cut
and (b) transverse cut(a) (b)
(a) (b)
Rationalised 2023-24
42 SCIENCE
s r e b m i l C
t c u d n o C
s r e p e e r C
s t o o r s u o r b i F
s b r e H
a n i m a L
s t o o r l a r e t a L
b i r d i M
e l u v O
n o i t a n e V l e l l a r a P
l a t e P  e l o i t e P
s i s e h t n y s o t o h P
l i t s i P
n o i t a n e v e t a l u c i t e R
l a p e S
s b u r h S
n e m a t S
t o o r p a T
n o i t a r i p s n a r T
s e e r T
s n i e V
  Plants are usually grouped into herbs, shrubs and trees based on their
height, nature of stem and branches.
  The stem bears leaves, flowers and fruits.
  Leaf usually has a petiole and lamina.
  The pattern of veins on the leaf is called venation. It can be reticulate or
parallel.
  Leaves give out water vapour through the process of transpiration.
  Green leaves make their food by the process of photosynthesis using
carbon dioxide and water in the presence of sunlight.
  Roots absorb water and minerals from the soil. They also anchor the
plant firmly in the soil.
  Roots are mainly of two types: tap root and fibrous root.
  Plants having leaves with reticulate venation have tap roots while plants
having leaves with parallel venation have fibrous roots.
  The stem conducts water from roots to the leaves (and other parts) and
food from leaves to other parts of the plant.
  The parts of a flower are sepals, petals, stamens and pistil.
Rationalised 2023-24
43 GETTING  TO KNOW PLANTS1. Correct the following statements and rewrite them in your notebook.
(a) Stem absorbs water and minerals from the soil.
(b) Leaves hold the plant upright.(c) Roots conduct water to the leaves.(d) The number of petals and stamens in a flower is always equal.
(e) If the sepals of a flower are joined together, its petals are also joined
together.
(f) If the petals of a flower are joined together, then the pistil is joined to the
petal.
2. Draw (a) a leaf, (b) a taproot and (c) a flower, you have studied for Table 4.3.
3. Can you find a plant in your house or in your neighborhood, which has a long
but weak stem? Write its name. In which category will you place it?
4. What is the function of a stem?5. Which of the following leaves have reticulate venation?
Wheat, tulsi, maize, grass, coriander ( dhania ), China rose
6. If a plant has fibrous root, what type of venation do its leaves have?
7. If a plant has leaves with reticulate venation, what kind of roots will it have?
8. Is it possible for you to find out whether a plant has taproot or fibrous roots by
looking at the impression of its leaf on a sheet of paper?
9. What are the parts of a flower.
10. From the following plants, which of them have flowers?
Grass, maize, wheat, chilli, tomato, tulsi, peepal , shisham , banyan, mango, jamun ,
guava, pomegranate, papaya, banana, lemon, sugarcane, potato, groundnut
11. Name the part of plant which produces food. Name the process.12. In which part of a flower, you will find the ovary?13. Name two plants in which one has joined sepals and the other has separate
sepals.
Rationalised 2023-24
44 SCIENCESUGGESTED PROJECT AND ACTIVITIES
1.BECOME A LEAF EXPERT
Do this activity with a number of leaves over a period of few weeks. For every
leaf that you wish to study, pluck it and wrap it in a wet cloth and take ithome. Now, place the leaf between the folds of a newspaper and place aheavy book on it. You can also put it under your mattress or a trunk! Takeout the leaf after a week. Paste it on a paper and write a poem or story aboutit. With your leaf collection pasted in a book, you can become an expert aboutleaves!
2. Names of plant parts are hidden in this grid. Search them by going up, down,
diagonally, forward or backward.  Have fun!
OVU LE LY TS TEM
VE INWQHERB P I
AN IMA LZEXRND
R F ILAMEN TMUR
YARAB LCODBE I
LEEUO FO LGH IB
A LH I IR JA LKUR
TM TNO T P PQRRA
EENS TU FEHVWN
PYAMG ITSZZNC
F LOWEREH TNAH
S TAMENNSE PA L
Rationalised 2023-24
