The lions that we see on our notes and coins 
have a long history. They were carved in stone, and placed on top of a massive stone pillar at Sarnath (about which you read in Chapter 6). 
Ashoka was one of the greatest rulers known 
to history and on his instructions inscriptions were inscribed on pillars, as well as on rock surfaces. Before we find out what was written in these inscriptions, let us see why his kingdom was called an empire.  
The empire that Ashoka ruled was founded 
by his grandfather, Chandragupta Maurya, more than 2300 years ago. Chandragupta was supported by a wise man named Chanakya or Kautilya. Many of Chanakya’s ideas were written down in a book called the Arthashastra.  CHAPTER 7 
FROM A KINGDOM TO AN EMPIRE
Dynasty
When members of the same family become rulers one after another, the 
family is often called a dynasty. The Mauryas were a dynasty with three important rulers — Chandragupta, his son Bindusara, and Bindusara’s son, Ashoka.The lion capital
Roshan’s rupees
Roshan clutched the crisp notes that her grandfather had given her on her birthday. While she badly wanted to buy a new CD, she also wanted to just see and feel the brand new notes. It was then that she noticed that all of them had a smiling face of Gandhiji printed on the right, and a tiny set of lions on the left. What were the lions there for, she wondered.
Chapter 7-8.indd   62 22 April 2022   02:36:26
Rationalised 2023-24
63 
from a kingdom  to an 
empireThe places where 
inscriptions of Ashoka have been found are marked with red dots. These were included within the empire.  Name the countries where Ashokan inscriptions have been found. Which Indian states were outside the empire? 
There were several cities in the empire (marked 
with black dots on the map). These included the 
capital Pataliputra, Taxila, and Ujjain. Taxila was a gateway to the northwest, including Central Asia, while Ujjain lay on the route from north to south India. Merchants, officials and craftspersons probably lived in these cities.  
In other areas there were villages of farmers and 
herders. In some areas such as central India, there were forests where people gathered forest produce and hunted animals for food. People in different parts of the empire spoke different languages. 
Map : 5
The Mauryan Empire: showing the principal 
cities and some of the places where 
inscriptions were found.
Inscriptions were found
Chapter 7-8.indd   63 22 April 2022   02:36:28
Rationalised 2023-24
 64
our pasts–iThey probably ate different kinds of food, and wore 
different kinds of clothes as well. 
How are empires different from kingdoms?
• Emperors need more resources than kings because 
empires are larger than kingdoms, and need to be 
protected by big armies.  
• So also they need a larger number of officials who 
collect taxes.  
Ruling the empire
As the empire was so large, different parts were 
ruled differently. The area around Pataliputra was 
under the direct control of the emperor. This meant 
that officials were appointed to collect taxes from farmers, herders, craftspersons and traders, who 
lived in villages and towns in the area. Officials 
also punished those who disobeyed the ruler’s 
orders. Many of these officials were given salaries. 
Messengers went to and fro, and spies kept a watch on the officials. And of course the emperor supervised them all, with the help of members of the royal family, and senior ministers.
There were other areas or provinces. Each of 
these was ruled from a provincial capital such as Taxila or Ujjain. Although there was some amount of control from Pataliputra, and royal princes were often sent as governors, local customs and rules were probably followed.
Besides, there were vast areas between these 
centres. Here the Mauryas tried to control roads 
and rivers, which were important for transport, and 
to collect whatever resources were available as tax 
and tribute. For example, the Arthashastra  tells us 
that the north-west was important for blankets, 
and south India for its gold and precious stones. It is possible that these resources were collected as tribute. 
Chapter 7-8.indd   64 22 April 2022   02:36:28
Rationalised 2023-24
65 
from a kingdom  to an 
empireT ribute
Unlike taxes, which were collected on a regular 
basis, tribute was collected as and when it was possible from people who gave a variety of things, more or less willingly.
There were also the forested regions. People 
living in these areas were more or less independent, but may have been expected to provide elephants, timber, honey and wax to Mauryan officials. 
The emperor and the capital city 
Megasthenes was an ambassador who was sent to the court of Chandragupta by the Greek ruler of West Asia named Seleucus Nicator. 
Megasthenes wrote an account about what he 
saw. Here is a part of his description:  
 “The occasions on which the emperor appears in 
public are celebrated with grand royal processions. He is carried in a golden palanquin. His guards ride elephants decorated with gold and silver. Some of the guards carry trees on which live birds, including a flock of trained parrots, circle about the head of the emperor. The king is normally surrounded by armed women. He is afraid that someone may try to kill him. He has special servants to taste the food before he eats. He never sleeps in the same bedroom for two nights.”
And about Pataliputra (modern Patna), he wrote:“This is a large and beautiful city. It is surrounded 
by a massive wall. It has 570 towers and 64 gates. The houses, of two and three storeys, are built of wood and mud brick. The king’s palace is also of wood, and decorated with stone carvings. It is surrounded with gardens and enclosures for keeping birds.”
Why do you think the king had special servants 
to taste the food he ate?
In what ways was Pataliputra different from 
Mohenjodaro? (hint: see Chapter 3)
Chapter 7-8.indd   65 22 April 2022   02:36:28
Rationalised 2023-24
 66
our pasts–iAshoka, a unique ruler
The most famous Mauryan ruler was Ashoka. He 
was the first ruler who tried to take his message to the people through inscriptions. Most of Ashoka’s inscriptions were in Prakrit and were written in the Brahmi script.
Ashoka’s war in Kalinga
Kalinga is the ancient name of coastal Orissa (see Map 5, page 63). Ashoka fought a war to conquer Kalinga. However, he was so horrified when he saw the violence and bloodshed that he decided not to fight any more wars. He is the only king in the history of the world who gave up conquest after winning a war. 
Ashoka’s inscription describing the Kalinga war
This is what Ashoka declared in one of his inscriptions: 
“Eight years after becoming king I conquered Kalinga. About a lakh and a half people were captured. And more than a lakh 
of people were killed. 
This filled me with sorrow. Why?Whenever an independent land is conquered, lakhs of people die, and 
many are taken prisoner. Brahmins and monks also die.
People who are kind to their relatives and friends, to their slaves and 
servants die, or lose their loved ones.
That is why I am sad, and have decided to observe dhamma, and to 
teach others about it as well.
I believe that winning people over through dhamma is much better than 
conquering them through force.
I am inscribing this message for the future, so that my son and grandson 
after me should not think about war.
Instead, they should try to think about how to spread dhamma.”
How did the Kalinga war bring about a change in Ashoka’s attitude 
towards war?
(‘Dhamma’ is the Prakrit word for the Sanskrit term ‘Dharma’).
Chapter 7-8.indd   66 22 April 2022   02:36:28
Rationalised 2023-24
67 
from a kingdom  to an 
empireThe Rampurwa bull.
Look at this finely polished stone sculpture. This was part of a Mauryan pillar found in Rampurwa, Bihar, and has now been placed in Rashtrapati Bhavan. It is an example of the skill of the sculptors of the time.What was Ashoka’s dhamma?
Ashoka’s dhamma  did not involve worship of a god, 
or performance of a sacrifice. He felt that just as a 
father tries to teach his children, he had a duty to instruct his subjects. He was also inspired by the teachings of the Buddha (Chapter 6).
There were a number of problems that troubled 
him. People in the empire followed different religions, and this sometimes led to conflict. Animals were sacrificed. Slaves and servants were ill treated. Besides, there were quarrels in families and amongst neighbours. Ashoka felt it was his duty to solve these problems. So, he appointed officials, known as the dhamma  
mahamatta  who went from 
place to place teaching people about dhamma. Besides, 
Ashoka got his messages inscribed on rocks and pillars, instructing his officials to read his message to those who could not read it themselves. 
Ashoka also sent messengers 
to spread ideas about dhamma to other lands, such as Syria, Egypt, Greece, and his son Mahendra and daughter Sanghmitra to Sri Lanka. Try and identify these on Map 6, pages 70–71 . He built roads, 
dug wells, and built rest houses. Besides, he arranged for medical treatment for both human beings and animals.  
Chapter 7-8.indd   67 22 April 2022   02:36:29
Rationalised 2023-24
 68
our pasts–i
Early Brahmi         Devanagari (Hindi)     Bengali              Malayalam             T amilBelow : The Brahmi script.
Most modern Indian scripts have developed from the Brahmi script over hundreds of years.Here you can see the letter ‘a’ written in different scripts. Ashoka’s message to his subjects:
“People perform a variety of rituals when they fall 
ill, when their children get married, when children are born, or when they go on a journey.  
These rituals are not useful.If instead, people observe other practices, this 
would be more fruitful. What are these other practices?
These are: being gentle with slaves and servants.Respecting one’s elders.Treating all creatures with compassion.Giving gifts to brahmins and monks.”“It is both wrong to praise one’s own religion or 
criticise another’s. 
Each one should respect the other’s religion.If one praises one’s own religion while criticising 
another’s, one is actually doing greater harm to one’s own religion. 
Therefore, one should try to understand the main 
ideas of another’s religion, and respect it.”
Identify the parts of Ashoka’s message that you 
think are relevant today.
Imagine
You live in Kalinga, and your parents have suffered in the war. Messengers from Ashoka have just arrived with the new ideas about dhamma . Describe the dialogue between 
them and your parents. 
Let’s recall 
1. Make a list of the occupations of the people who 
lived within the Mauryan empire. 
2. Complete the following sentences:
 (a) Officials collected __________ from the area under 
the direct control of the ruler. 
Chapter 7-8.indd   68 22 April 2022   02:36:29
Rationalised 2023-24
69 
from a kingdom  to an 
empireKEYWORDS
empire 
capital 
province 
dhamma  
messenger 
official (b) Royal princes often went to the provinces as 
______________.
 (c) The Mauryan rulers tried to control _____________
and ______________ which were important for 
transport. 
 (d) People in forested regions provided the Mauryan 
officials with ____________.
3. State whether true or false:
 (a) Ujjain was the gateway to the north-west.
 (b) Chandragupta’s ideas were written down in the 
Arthashastra.
 (c) Kalinga was the ancient name of Bengal.
 (d) Most Ashokan inscriptions are in the Brahmi 
script.
Let’s discuss 
4. What were the problems that Ashoka wanted to solve 
by introducing dhamma? 
5. What were the means adopted by Ashoka to spread 
the message of dhamma?
6. Why do you think slaves and servants were  
ill-treated? Do you think the orders of the emperor would have improved their condition? Give reasons for your answer. 
Let’s do 
7. Write a short paragraph explaining to Roshan why 
the lions are shown on our currency notes. List at least one other object on which you see them. 
8. Suppose you had the power to inscribe your orders, 
what four commands would you like to issue?
	Beginning of the 
Mauryan empire (more than 2300 years ago)SOME IMPORTANT
DATES
Chapter 7-8.indd   69 22 April 2022   02:36:29
Rationalised 2023-24
 70
our pasts–i
These routes were under the 
control of Chinese rulers.
These routes were under 
the control of the Kushanas (Chapter 8).
These were important sea 
routes.
These routes were under the 
control of the rulers of Iran (Persia).
These routes were controlled by 
the Roman emperors.Map : 6  
Showing Important T rade Routes including the Silk Route
Chapter 7-8.indd   70 22 April 2022   02:36:32
Rationalised 2023-24
71 
from a kingdom  to an 
empire
A Shaka coin
Based on The Times Atlas of World History, 
(ed. Geoffrey Barraclough) Hammond Inc, New Jersey, 1 986, pp 70–71. 
Chinese, Indian, Iranian, Arab, 
Greek and Roman traders participated in these exchanges.
The ports along the coast of 
south India were important centres for the export of pepper and other spices. 
Find Poduca (south India) on the 
map. This was the Roman name for Arikamedu (Chapter 8). 
Chapter 7-8.indd   71 22 April 2022   02:36:33
Rationalised 2023-24
LOOKING AHEAD
The Mauryan empire collapsed about 2200 years ago. In its place (and elsewhere) rose 
several new kingdoms. In the north-west, and in parts of north India, kings known as the Indo-Greeks ruled for about one hundred years. They were followed by a Central 
Asian people known as the Shakas, who set up kingdoms in the north-west, north and western India. Some of these kingdoms lasted for about 500 years, till the Shakas   were defeated by the Gupta kings (Chapter 9). The Shakas in turn were followed by the Kushanas (about 2000 years ago). You will learn more about the Kushanas in Chapter 8. 
In the north, and in parts of 
central India, a general of the Mauryas, named Pushyamitra Shunga, set up a kingdom. The Shungas were followed by another 
dynasty, known as the Kanvas, and by rulers from other families till the establishment of the Gupta empire about 1700 years ago.
The Shakas who ruled over parts of western India fought 
several battles with the Satavahanas, who ruled over western and parts of central India. The Satavahana kingdom, which was established about 2100 years ago, lasted for about 400 years. Around 1700 years ago, a new ruling family, known as the Vakatakas, became powerful in central and western India. 
In south India, the Cholas, Cheras and Pandyas ruled 
between 2200 and 1800 years ago. And, about 1500 years ago, there were two large kingdoms, those of the Pallavas and the Chalukyas. There were several other kingdoms and kings as well. We know about them from their coins and inscriptions, as well as from books. 
There were other changes that were taking place, in 
which ordinary men and women played a major role. These included the spread of agriculture and the growth of new towns, craft production and trade. 
Traders explored land routes within the subcontinent and outside, and sea routes to West Asia, East Africa and South East Asia (see Map 6) were also opened up. And many new buildings were built — including the earliest temples and stupas, books were written, and scientific discoveries were made. These developments took place simultaneously, i.e. at the same time. Keep this in mind as you read the rest 
of the book. 
A Kushana coin
A Satavahana coin 
An Indo-Greek coin
A Shaka coin
Chapter 7-8.indd   72 22 April 2022   02:36:33
Rationalised 2023-24
