45 BODY MOVEMENTS5 Body Movements
Sit absolutely still. Observe the
movements taking place in your
body. You must be blinking your
eyes, time to time. Observe the
movements in your body as you
breathe. There are so many movements
that happen in our bodies.
When you are writing in your
notebook which part of the body are youmoving? Or, when you turn and look atyour friend? Different parts of your body
move while you remain at the same
place, in these examples. You also movefrom one place to another — you get up
and go to your teacher or to the school
compound, or go home after school. Youwalk, run, skip, jump and move from
place to place.
Let us see how animals move from
place to place by filling up Table 5.1,after discussing with our friends,
teachers and parents.Walk, run, fly, jump, creep, crawl,
slither and swim – these are only a few
of the ways in which animals move from
one place to another. Why are there somany differences in the way that
animals move from place to place? Why
is it that many animals walk while asnake slithers or crawls and a fish
swims?
5.1 H UMAN BODY AND ITS MOVEMENTS
Let us look closely at some of our own
movements to begin with, before lookingat all these varieties of movements in
animals.
Do you enjoy doing physical exercise
at school? How do you move your handsand legs while doing different exercises?Table 5.1 How do animals move
from place to place?
l a m i n Ad e s u t r a p y d o B
g n i v o m r o f
o t e c a l p m o r f
e c a l ps e o d w o H
l a m i n a e h t
? e v o m
w o C s g e L k l a W
s n a m u H
e k a n S y d o b e l o h W r e h t i l S
d r i B
t c e s n I
h s i F
Boojho wonders about movements
in plants. He knows they do notmove from place to place, but, do
they show any other kind of
movements?
Rationalised 2023-24
46 SCIENCE
Let us try some of the many movements,
our body is capable of.
Bowl an imaginary ball at an
imaginary wicket. How did you moveyour arm? Did you rotate it at theshoulder in a circular movement? Did
your shoulder also move? Lie down and
rotate your leg at the hip. Bend yourarm at the elbow and the leg at the knee.
Stretch your arm sideways. Bend your
arm to touch your shoulder with yourfingers. Which part of your arm did you
bend? Straighten your arm and try to
bend it downwards. Are you able todo it?
Try to move the various parts of your
body and record their movements inTable 5.2.Why is it that we are able to move a
few parts of our body easily in variousdirections and some only in one
direction? Why are we unable to move
some parts at all?
Activity 1
Place a scale length-wise on your armso that your elbow is in the centre
(Fig. 5.1).
Ask your friend to tie the scale and
your arm together. Now,try to bend your elbow.
Are you able to do it?
Table 5.2 Movements in our body
s e t a t o R
y l e t e l p m o cs e t a t o R
s n r u t / y l t r a ps d n e B s t f i Lt o n s e o D
l l a t a e v o m
k c e N s e Y
t s i r W
r e g n i F
e e n K
e l k n A
e o T
k c a B
d a e H
w o b l E
m r A s e YFig. 5.1 Can you bend
your arm now?
Body PartMovement
Rationalised 2023-24
47 BODY MOVEMENTSDid you notice that we are able to bend
or rotate our body in places where two
parts of our body seem to be joinedtogether — like elbow, shoulder or neck?
These places are called joints. Can you
name more such joints? If our body has
no joints, do you think it would be
possible for us to move in any way at all?
What exactly is joined together at
these joints?
Press your fingers against the top of
your head, face, neck, nose, ear, back of
the shoulder, hands and legs including
the fingers and toes.
Do you get a feel of something hard
pressing against your fingers?  The hardstructures are the bones. Repeat this
activity on other parts of your body. Somany bones!
Bones cannot be bent. So, how do
we bend our elbow? It is not one longbone from the upper arm to our wrist. It
is different bones joined together at the
elbow. Similarly, there are many bonespresent in each part of the body.  We
can bend or move our body only at those
points where bones meet.
There are different types of joints in
our body to help us carry out differentmovements and activities. Let us learnabout some of them.
Ball and socket joints
Activity 2
Roll a strip of paper into a cylinder. Make
a small hole in an old rubber or plastic
ball (under supervision) and push thepaper cylinder into it as shown in
Fig. 5.2. You can also stick the cylinder
on the ball. Put the ball in a small bowl.Does the ball rotate freely inside the bowl?
Does the paper cylinder also rotate?
Now, imagine that the paper cylinder
is your arm and the ball is its end. Thebowl is like the part of the shoulder towhich your arm is joined. The roundedend of one bone fits into the cavity
(hollow space) of the other bone
(Fig.5.3). Such a joint allows movements
in all directions.  Can you name anothersuch joint you can think of, recollectingthe body movements we tried at thebeginning of this section?
Pivotal Joint
The joint where our neck joins the head
is a pivotal joint (Fig. 5.4). It allows us
to bend our head forward and backwardand turn the head to our right or left.Try these movements. How are thesemovements different from those of our
arm that can rotate a complete circle inFig. 5.3  A ball and socket joint
Thigh Bone
Hip BoneFig. 5.2  Making a ball and socket joint
Ball and
Socket JointBowl
Ball
Paper Cylinder
Rationalised 2023-24
48 SCIENCE
its ball and socket joint? In a pivotal
joint a cylindrical bone rotates in a ring.
Hinge joints
Open and close a door a few times.Observe the hinges  of the door carefully.
They allow the door to move back
and forth.
Activity 3
Let us look at the kind of movementallowed by a hinge. Make a cylinder withcardboard or thick chart paper, as
shown in Fig. 5.5. Attach a small pencil
to the cylinder by piercing the cylinderat the centre, as shown. Make a hollow
half cylinder from cardboard such that
the rolled up cylinder can fit inside iteasily. The hollow half cylinder with the
rolled up cylinder sitting inside it, allows
movement like a hinge. Try to move therolled up cylinder. How does it move?
How is this movement different from
what we saw with our constructed balland socket joint? We saw this kind ofmovement at the elbow in Activity 1.
What we have constructed in Fig. 5.5 is
different from a hinge, of course. But, itillustrates the direction in which a hinge
allows movement. The elbow has a hinge
joint that allows only a back and forthmovement (Fig. 5.6). Can you think of
more examples of such joints?
Fixed joints
Some joints between bones in our head
are different from those we havediscussed so far. The bones cannot move
at these joints. Such joints are called
fixed  joints. When you open your
mouth wide, you can move your lower
jaw away from your head, isn’t it? Try
to move your upper jaw, now. Are youable to move it? There is a  joint between
the upper jaw and the rest of the head
which is a fixed joint.
We discussed only some of the joints
that connect parts of our body.
What gives the different parts of the
body their different shapes?
If you wanted  to make a doll, what
will you make first? Perhaps aframework to give the doll shape before
making its outer structure, isn’t it? All
the bones in our body also form aframework to give a shape to our body.
Fig. 5.5 Directions of movement allowed by a
hinge like jointFig. 5.6  Hinge joints of the knee
Fig. 5.4 A pivotal jointPivotal joint
Rationalised 2023-24
49 BODY MOVEMENTS
Fig. 5.9  Bones of the handBend your fingers. Are you able to
bend them at every joint? How many
bones does your middle finger have?
Feel the back of your palm. It seems to
have many bones, isn’t it (Fig. 5.9)? Isyour wrist flexible? It is made up of
several small bones called carples . What
will happen if it has only one bone?This framework is
called the skeleton
(Fig. 5.7.)
How do we know
that this is the shapeof a human skeleton?
How do we know the
shapes of the differentbones in our body? We
can have some idea
about the shape andnumber of bones in
some parts of our body
by feeling them. Oneway we could know
this shape better
would be to look atX-ray images of the
human body.
Did you or anyone in your family
ever have an X-ray of any part of yourbody taken? Sometimes when we are
hurt, or have an accident, doctors usethese X-ray images to find out about
any possible injuries that might
have happened to the bones. TheX-rays show the shapes of the bones
in our bodies.
 Feel the bones in your forearm,
upper arm, lower leg and upper leg. Tryto find the number of bones in each part.Similarly, feel the bones of your ankle
and knee joints and compare these withthe X-ray images (Fig. 5.8).The human skeleton is composed of
around 305 bones at birth. The
number of bones in the skeletonchanges with age. It decreases to 206
bones by adulthood after some bones
have fused together.
Fig. 5.8  X-ray images of ankle and knee joints
Fig. 5.7  The
Human skeleton
Activity 4
Take a deep breath and hold it for alittle while. Feel your chest bones and theback bone by gently pressing the middle
of the chest and back at the same time.Count as many ribs (bones of the chest)
Rationalised 2023-24
50 SCIENCEFig. 5.13  Pelvic bones
as possible. Observe Fig. 5.10 carefully
and compare with what you feel of the
chest bones. We see that the ribs are
curiously bent. They join the chest boneand the backbone together to form a
box. This is called the rib cage. There
are 12 ribs on each side of chest. Someimportant internal parts of our body lie
protected inside this cage.
Ask some friends to touch their toes
without bending their knees. Starting
from the neck, move your
fingers downwards on theback of your friend. What
you feel is the  backbone . It
is made up of many small
bones called vertebrae. The
backbone consists of 33
vertebrae (Fig. 5.11). The ribcage is joined to these bones.
If backbone was made
up of only one long bone,will your friend be able to
bend?
Make your friend stand
with both hands pressed to
the wall and ask her to push
the wall. Do you notice twoFig. 5.12  Shoulder bones
Fig. 5.14  The skullFig. 5.11
The backboneThe skull is made up of many bones
joined together (Fig. 5.14). It encloses
and protects a very important part ofthe body, the brain.
We discussed many bones and
the joints of our skeleton. There arebones on the back are prominent where
the shoulders are? They are calledshoulder bones  (Fig. 5.12).
Observe Fig.
 5.13 carefully. This
structure is made of pelvic bones . They
enclose the portion of your body
below the stomach. This is the part
you sit on.
Fig. 5.10  The rib cage
Rationalised 2023-24
51 BODY MOVEMENTSsome additional parts of the skeleton
that are not as hard as the bones and
which can be bent. These are called
cartilage .
Feel your ear. Do you find any hard
bony parts that can be bent(Fig. 5.15)? There do not seem to be anybones here, isn’t it? Do you notice
anything different between the ear lobe
and the portions above it (Fig. 5.16), as
you press them between your fingers?
observe a swollen region in the upper
arm? This is a muscle . The muscle
bulged due to contraction (it became
smaller in length). Now bring your arm
back to its normal position. What
happened to the muscle? Is it stillcontracted? You can observe similar
contraction of muscles in your leg when
you walk or run.
When contracted, the muscle
becomes shorter, stiffer and thicker. Itpulls the bone.
Muscles work in pairs. When one of
them contracts, the bone is pulled inthat direction. The other muscle of thepair relaxes. To move the bone in the
opposite direction, the relaxed musle
contracts to pull the bone towards itsoriginal position, while the first relaxes.
A muscle can only pull. It cannot push.
Thus, two muscles have to work togetherto move a bone (Fig. 5.17).
Are muscles and bones always
required for movement? How do otheranimals move? Do all animals have
bones? What about an earthworm or aYou do feel something in the upper parts
of the ear that is not as soft as the earlobe but, not as hard as a bone, isn’t it?This is cartilage. Cartilage is also found
in the joints of the body.
We have seen that our skeleton is
made up of many bones, joints and
cartilage. You could feel, bend and move
many of them. Draw a neat figure of the
skeleton in your notebook.
We have learnt about the bones in our
body and about joints that help us move
in different ways. What makes the bones
move the way they do? Let us find out.
Make a fist with one hand, bend your
arm at the elbow and touch your
shoulder with the thumb (Fig. 5.17). Do
you see any change in your upper arm?
Touch it with the other hand. Do youFig. 5.17  Two muscles work together to move
a bone
Fig. 5.16
The ear lobe
Fig. 5.15  Upper part
of ear has cartilage
(a)
(b)
Rationalised 2023-24
52 SCIENCEsnail? Let us study the manner of
movement, that is, the gait of someanimals.
5.2 “G AIT OF ANIMALS ”
Earthworm
Activity 5
Observe an earthworm moving on soil
in a garden. Gently lift it and place it
on a piece of blotting or filter paper.Observe its movement (Fig. 5.18). Then
place it on a smooth glass plate or any
slippery surface. Observe its movementnow. Is it different from that on paper?
In which of the above two surfaces do
you find that the earthworm is able tomove easily?
The body of an earthworm is made
up of many rings joined end to end. An
This is called the shell and it is the
outer skeleton of the snail, but is not
made of bones. The shell is a single unit
and does not help in moving from placeto place. It has to be dragged along.
 Place the snail on a glass plate and
watch it. When it starts moving,carefully lift the glass plate along with
the snail over your head. Observe its
movements from beneath.
A thick structure and the head of the
snail may come out of an opening inFig. 5.18  Movement of earthworm
earthworm does not have bones. It hasmuscles which help to extend andshorten the body.  During movement,
the earthworm first extends the front
part of the body, keeping the rearportion fixed to the ground. Then it fixes
the front end and releases the rear end.
It then shortens the body and pulls therear end forward. This makes it move
forward by a small distance. Repeating
such muscle expansions and
contractions, the earthworm can movethrough soil. Its body secretes a slimysubstance to help the movement.
How does it fix parts of its body to
the ground? Under its body, it has alarge number of tiny bristles (hair like
structures) projecting out. The bristles
are connected with muscles. The bristleshelp to get a good grip on the ground.
The earthworm, actually, eats its way
through the soil! Its body then throwsaway the undigested part of the material
that it eats. This activity of an earthworm
makes the soil more useful for plants.
Snail
Activity 6
Observe a snail in your garden or in field.Have you seen the rounded structure itcarries on its back (Fig. 5. 19)?
Fig. 5.19 A snail
Rationalised 2023-24
53 BODY MOVEMENTS
of plates joined together and that
permits movement.
There are two pairs of wings attached
to the body behind head. Thecockroaches have distinct muscles —
those near the legs move the legs for
walking. The body muscles move thewings when the cockroach flies.
Birds
Birds fly in the air and walk on the
ground. Some birds like ducks and
swans also swim in water. The birds canfly because their bodies are well suited
for flying. Their bones are hollow and
light. The bones of the hind limbs aretypical for walking and perching. TheFig. 5.20 A cockroachthe shell. The thick structure is its foot,made of strong muscles. Now, carefullytilt the glass plate. The wavy motion of
the foot can be seen. Is the movement of
a snail slow or fast as compared to anearthworm?
Cockroach
Activity 7
Observe a cockroach (Fig. 5.20).
Cockroaches walk and climb as well
as fly in the air. They have three pairsof legs. These help in walking. The bodyis covered with a hard outer skeleton.
This outer skeleton is made of numberFig. 5.21 Skeleton of a bird
bony parts of the forelimbs are modified
as wings. The shoulder bones are strong.The breastbones are modified to hold
muscles of flight which are used to move
the wings up and down (Fig. 5.21).
Fish
Activity 8
Make a paper boat. Put it in water andpush it with one narrow end pointingforward [Fig. 5.22 (a)]. Did it go into the
water easily? Now hold the boat
sideways and push it into the waterfrom the broad side [Fig. 5.22 (b)]. Are
you able to make the boat move in water
when you push it from this side?
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5.22  Playing with boats
Rationalised 2023-24
54 SCIENCE
Have you noticed that the shape of a
boat is somewhat like a fish (Fig 5.23)?
The head and tail of the fish are smaller
than the middle portion of the body –the body tapers at both ends. This body
shape is called streamlined.
The shape is such that water can flow
around it easily and allow the fish tomove in water.The skeleton of the fish
is covered with strong muscles. Duringswimming, muscles make the front part
of the body curve to one side and the
tail part swings towards the oppositeside. The fish forms a curve as shown
in Fig. 5.24. Then, quickly, the body and
tail curve to the other side. This makesa jerk and pushes the body forward. A
series of such jerks make the fish swim
ahead. This is helped by the fins ofthe tail.Fish also have other fins on their
body which mainly help to keep thebalance of the body and to keep
direction, while swimming. Did you ever
notice that under water divers wear finlike flippers on their feet, to help them
move easily in water?
How do snakes move?
Have you seen a snake slither? Does itmove straight (Fig. 5.25)?
Snakes have a long backbone. They
have many thin muscles. They areconnected to each other even though they
are far from one another. Muscles alsointerconnect the backbone, ribs and skin.
The snake’s body curves into many
loops. Each loop of the snake gives it aforward push by pressing against the
ground. Since its long body makes
many loops and each loop gives it thispush, the snake moves forward very fast
and not in a straightline.
We have learned about the use of
bones and muscles for the movementsof different animals. Paheli and Boojho
have many questions in their sacksabout the different movements in
animals. So must you be having many
unanswered questions buzzing in yourFig. 5.23 Fish
Fig. 5.24 Movement in Fish
 Fig. 5.25  Movement in a snake
Rationalised 2023-24
55 BODY MOVEMENTSminds? The ancient Greek philosopher
Aristotle, in his book Gait of Animals,
asked himself these questions. Why do
different animals have the body parts
that they do have and how do thesebody parts help animals to move the
way they do? What are the similarities
and differences in these body partsbetween different animals? How many
body parts are needed by different
animals for moving from place toplace? Why two legs for humans andfour for cows and buffaloes? Manyanimals seem to be having an even
number of legs, why? Why is the
bending of our legs different from thatof our arms?
So many questions and perhaps
we have looked for some answersthrough our activities in this chapter
and we need to look for many
more answers.
Yoga — For Better Health
Yoga is an invaluable gift of the ancient Indian tradition. The United Nationsdeclared 21 June as International Day of Yoga. Yoga keeps a person healthy. Ithelps in keeping the backbone erect, enabling you to sit straight and not
slouch. Many postures in yoga require you to lift your own weight, which help
in making the bones strong and help ward off osteoporosis. It also helps inrelieving joint pain, which is mostly observed in elderly people. It tunes all
muscles in the body and keeps them active. It keeps the heart healthy and
makes it work more efficiently. Certain yoga postures should be performedunder the supervision of a trained person.
Rationalised 2023-24
56 SCIENCEe n o b k c a B
t n i o j t e k c o s d n a l l a B
s e l t s i r B
e g a l i t r a C
y t i v a C
t n i o j d e x i F
s l a m i n a f o t i a G
t n i o j e g n i He l c s u M
n o t e l e k s r e t u O
s e n o b c i v l e P
t n i o j l a t o v i P
e g a c b i R
s e n o b r e d l u o h S
n o t e l e k S
d e n i l m a e r t S
  Bones and cartilage form the skeleton of the human body. It gives the
frame and shape to the body and helps in movement. It protects theinner organs.
  The human skeleton comprises the skull, the back bone, ribs and the
breast bone, shoulder and hipbones, and the bones of hands and legs.
  The bones are moved by alternate contractions and relaxations of two
sets of muscles.
  The bone joints are of various kinds depending on the nature of joints
and direction of movement they allow.
  Strong muscles and light bones work together to help the birds fly. They
fly by flapping their wings.
  Fish swim by forming loops alternately on two sides of the body.
  Snakes slither on the ground by looping sideways. A large number of
bones and associated muscles push the body forward.
  The body and legs of cockroaches have hard coverings forming an outer
skeleton. The muscles of the breast connected with three pairs of legsand two pairs of wings help the cockroach to walk and fly.
  Earthworms move by alternate extension and contraction of the body
using muscles. Tiny bristles on the underside of the body help in grippingthe ground.
  Snails move with the help of a muscular foot.
Rationalised 2023-24
57 BODY MOVEMENTS1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Joints of the bones help in the ——————— of the body.
(b) A combination of bones and cartilages forms the _______ of the body.(c) The bones at the elbow are joined by a ______________________ joint.(d) The contraction of the _____________ pulls the bones during movement.
2. Indicate true (T) and false (F) among the following sentences.
(a) The movement and locomotion of all animals is exactly the same. (  )(b) The cartilages are harder than bones. (       )(c) The finger bones do not have joints. (      )(d) The fore arm has two bones. ( )(e) Cockroaches have an outer skeleton. (     )
3. Match the items in Column I with one or more items of Column II.
I n m u l o C I I n m u l o C
w a j r e p p U y d o b e h t n o s n i f e v a h
h s i F n o t e l e k s r e t u o n a s a h
s b i R r i a e h t n i y l f n a c
l i a n S t n i o j e l b a v o m m i n a s i
h c a o r k c o C t r a e h e h t t c e t o r p
t n e m e v o m w o l s y r e v s w o h s
y d o b d e n i l m a e r t s a e v a h
4. Answer the following:
(a) What is a ball and socket joint?(b) Which of the skull bones are movable?(c) Why can our elbow not move backwards?
THINGS TO THINK ABOUT
We discussed the many movements our bodies are capable of. Healthy bones,
muscles, joints and cartilages are needed by the body for all these movements.Some of us suffer from conditions that could make these movements not so easy. Ina whole class activity, try to find ways that one would manage everyday activities, ifany one of our body movements was not possible. In Activity 1, for instance, youtied a scale on your arm and disabled the elbow movement. Think of other ways ofrestricting normal body movements and find ways that everyday activities couldthen be managed.
Rationalised 2023-24
