95 ELECTRICITY  AND CIRCUITS
9 Electricity and Circuits
We use electricity for many
purposes to make our tasks
easier. For example, we use
electricity to operate pumps that lift
water from wells or from ground level
to the roof top tank. What are other
purposes for which you use electricity?List some of them in your notebook.
Does your list include the use of
electricity for lighting? Electricitymakes it possible to light our homes,
roads, offices, markets and factories
even after sunset. This helps us tocontinue working at night. A power station
provides us with electricity. However, the
supply of electricity may fail or it may notbe available at some places. In such
situations, a torch is sometimes used for
providing light. A torch has a bulb thatlights up when it is switched on. Where
does the torch get electricity from?
9.1. E LECTRIC  CELL
Electricity to the bulb in a torch is
provided by the electric cell. Electric cellsare also used in alarm clocks,wristwatches, transistor radios, cameras
and many other devices. Have you ever
carefully looked at an electric cell?  Youmight have noticed that it has a small
metal cap on one side and a metal disc
on the other side (Fig. 9.1). Did younotice a positive (+) sign and a negative
(–) sign marked on the electric cell? The
Fig.9.1  An Electric Cell
metal cap is the positive terminal of the
electric cell. The metal disc is the
negative terminal. All electric cells have
two terminals; a positive terminal and anegative terminal.
An electric cell produces electricity
from the chemicals stored inside it.When the chemicals in the electric cell
are used up, the electric cell stops
You might have seen the  danger sign shown here displayed on poles,
electric substations and many other places. It is to warn people that
electricity can be dangerous if not handled properly.  Carelessness in
handling electricity and electric devices can cause severe injuries andsometimes even death. Hence, you should never attempt to experiment
with the electric wires and sockets. Also remember that the electricity
generated by portable generators is equally dangerous. Use only electriccells for all activities related to electricity.
Caution
Rationalised 2023-24
96 SCIENCEproducing electricity. The electric cell
then has to be replaced with a new one.
A torch bulb has an outer case of
glass that is fixed on a metallic base[Fig. 9.2 (a)]. What is inside the glass
case of the bulb?
Activity 1
Take a torch and look inside its bulb.
You can also take out the bulb with the
help of your teacher. What do you
notice? Do you find a thin wire fixed inthe middle of the glass bulb [Fig. 9.2
(b)]? Now switch the torch on and
observe which part of the bulb isglowing.
The thin wire that gives off light is
called the filament  of the bulb. The
filament is fixed to two thicker wires,
which also provide support to it, as
shown in Fig. 9.2 (b). One of these thickwires is connected to the metal case at
the base of the bulb [Fig. 9.2 (b)].  The
other thick wire is connected to themetal tip at the centre of the base. The
base of the bulb and the metal tip of the
base are the two terminals of the bulb.These two terminals are fixed in such away that they do not touch each other.
The electric bulbs used at home also
have a similar design.
Thus, both the electric cell and the
bulb have two terminals each. Why dothey have these two terminals?
9.2 A B ULB CONNECTED  TO
AN ELECTRIC  CELL
Let us try to make an electric bulb lightup using an electric cell.  How do we dothat?
Activity 2
Take four lengths of electric wire withdifferently coloured plastic coverings.
Remove a little of the plastic covering
from each length of wire at the ends.This would expose the metal wires at
the ends of each length. Fix the exposed
parts of two wires to the cell and theother two of the bulb as shown in
Fig. 9.3 and Fig. 9.4.
Fig.9.2  (a) Torch bulb and (b) its inside view
Fig.9.3  Electric cell with two wires attached to itFilament
TerminalsCaution: Never join the two terminals
of the electric cell without connectingthem through a switch and a device
like a bulb. If you do so, the chemicals
in the electric cell get used up very fastand the cell stops working.
(a) (b)
Rationalised 2023-24
97 ELECTRICITY  AND CIRCUITS
Write 'Yes' or 'No' for each arrangement
in your notebook.
Now, carefully look at the
arrangements in which the bulb glows.Compare these with those in which the
bulb does not glow. Can you find the
reason for the difference?
Keep the tip of your pencil on the
wire near one terminal of the electric cellfor the arrangment in Fig. 9.5 (a). Movethe pencil along the wire all the way to
the bulb. Now, from the other terminal
of the bulb, move along the other wireconnected to the cell. Repeat this
exercise for all the other arrangements
in Fig. 9.5. Did the bulb glow for thearrangements in which you could not
move the pencil from one terminal to
the other?You can stick the wires to the bulb
with the tape used by electricians. Userubber bands or tape to fix the wires to
the cell.
Now, connect the wires fixed to the
bulb with those attached to the cell insix different ways as have been shown in
Fig. 9.5 (a) to (f). For each arrangement,find out whether the bulb glows or not.
 (d) (e)        (f)
Fig.9.5 Different arrangements of electric cell and bulb(a)                                            (b) (c)Fig.9.4  Bulb connected to two wires
Rationalised 2023-24
98 SCIENCE9.3 A N ELECTRIC  CIRCUIT
In Activity 2 you connected one terminal
of the electric cell to the other terminal
through wires passing to and from the
electric bulb. Note that in thearrangements shown in Fig. 9. 5 (a) and
(f), the two terminals of the electric cell
were connected to two terminals of thebulb. Such an arrangement is an
example of an electric circuit. The electric
circuit provides a complete path forelectricity to pass (current to flow)
between the two terminals of the electric
cell. The bulb glows only when current
flows through the circuit.
In an electric circuit, the direction of
current is taken to be from the positiveto the negative terminal of the electric
cell as shown in Fig.9.6. When theAn electric bulb may fuse due to
many reasons. One reason for a bulb to
fuse is a break in its filament. A break
in the filament of an electric bulb means
a break in the path of the currentbetween the terminals of the electric cell.
Therefore, a fused bulb does not light
up as no current passes through itsfilament.
Can you now explain why the bulb
did not glow when you tried to do sowith the arrangements shown in
Fig. 9.5 (b), (c), (d) and (e)?
Now we know how to make a bulb
light up using an electric cell. Wouldyou like to make a torch for yourself?
Activity 3
Take a torch bulb and a piece of wire.
Remove the plastic covering at the two
ends of the wire as you did before. Wrap
one end of a wire around the base of an
electric bulb as shown in Fig. 9.7. Fix
the other end of the wire to the negativeterminal of an electric cell with a rubber
band.  Now, bring the tip of the base of
the bulb, that is, its other terminal incontact with the positive terminal of the
Fig. 9.7  A home-made torchterminals of the bulb are connected with
that of the electric cell by wires, the
current passes through the filament ofthe bulb. This makes the bulb glow.
Sometimes an electric bulb does not
glow even if it is connected to the cell.This may happen if the bulb has fused.
Look at a fused bulb carefully. Is thefilament inside it intact?Fig.9.6   Direction of current in an electric
circuit
Rationalised 2023-24
99 ELECTRICITY  AND CIRCUITS
a drawing pin into the ring at one
end of the safety pin and fix it on thethermo Col sheet as shown in Fig. 9.8.
Make sure that the safety pin can be
rotated freely. Now, fix the other drawingpin on the thermo Col sheet in a way
that the free end of the safety pin can
touch it. The safety pin fixed in this waywould be your switch in this activity.Paheli has anotherarrangement of the celland the bulb.  Will the
torch bulb glow in
the followingarrangement?
Fig. 9.9  An electric circuit with a switch
Fig. 9.10  A switch in ‘on’ position
 Fig. 9.8 A simple switchNow, make a circuit by connecting
an electric cell and a bulb with thisswitch as shown in Fig. 9.9. Rotate the
safety pin so that its free end touches
the other drawing pin. What do youobserve? Now, move the safety pin away.
Does the bulb continue to glow?
The safety pin covered the gap
between the drawing pins whenyou made it touch two of them. In
this position the switch is said to be 'on'(Fig. 9.10). Since the material of the
safety pin allows the current to passcell.  Does the bulb glow? Now move the
bulb away from the terminal of the
electric cell. Does the bulb remain
lighted? Is this not similar to what youdo when you switch your torch on or
off?
9.4 E LECTRIC  SWITCH
We had an arrangement for switchingon or off our home made torch by
moving the base of the bulb away fromthe tip of the cell. This was a simple
switch, but, not very easy to use. We
can make another simple and easierswitch to use in our circuit.
Activity 4
You can make a switch using twodrawing pins, a safety pin (or a paper
clip), two wires and a small sheet of
thermo Col or a wooden board. Insert
Rationalised 2023-24
100 SCIENCE
through it, the circuit was complete.
Hence, the bulb glows.
On the other hand, the bulb did not
glow when the safety pin was not intouch with the other drawing pin. Thecircuit was not complete as there was a
gap between the two drawing pins. Inthis position, the switch is said to be
'off' as in Fig. 9.9.
A switch is a simple device that either
breaks the circuit or completes it. Theswitches used in lighting of electricbulbs and other devices in homes work
on the same principle although their
designs are more complex.
9.5 E LECTRIC  CONDUCTORS  AND
INSULATORS
In all our activities we have used metalwires to make a circuit. Suppose we usea cotton thread instead of a metal wire
to make a circuit. Do you think that the
bulb will light up in such a circuit?What materials can be used in electric
circuits so that the current can pass
through them? Let us find out.
Activity 5
Disconnect the switch from the electriccircuit you used for Activity 4. This wouldleave you with two free ends of wires as
shown in Fig. 9.12 (a). Bring the free ends
of the two wires close, to let them toucheach other. Does the bulb light up? You
can now use this arrangement to test
whether any given material allows currentto pass through it or not.
Fig. 9.11  Inside view of a torchFig. 9.12  (a) A conduction tester (b) Testing
whether the bulb glows when the tester is in
contact with a key(a) (b)Boojho has drawn the insideof the torch as in Fig. 9.11.
When we close the switch,
the circuit is completed and
the bulb glows. Can you
draw a red line on the figure
indicating the complete circuit?
Reflector
Rationalised 2023-24
101 ELECTRICITY  AND CIRCUITSInsulators do not allow electric current
to pass through them. With the help of
Table 9.1, name the materials that are
conductors of electricity and also those
which are insulators.
Conductors ______, ______, _________
Insulator _________,  _______, ________
What do you conclude? Which
materials are conductors and which are
insulators? Recall the objects that we
grouped as those having lustre, in
Chapter 2. Are they the conductors? Itnow seems easy to understand why
copper, aluminum and other metals are
used for making wires.
Let us recall Activity 4 in which we
made an electric circuit with a switch(Fig.9.9). When the switch was in theopen position, were the two drawing pins
not connected with each other through
the thermo Col sheet? But, thermo Col,you may have found is an insulator.
What about the air between the gap?
Since the bulb does not glow when thereis only air in the gap between the drawing
pins in your switch, it means that air is
also an insulator.
Conductors and insulators are
equally important for us. Switches,electrical plugs and sockets are made ofconductors. On the other hand, rubber
and plastics are used for covering
electrical wires, plug tops, switches andother parts of electrical appliances,
which people might touch.Collect samples of different types of
materials such as coins, cork, rubber,
glass, keys, pins, plastic scale, wooden
block, aluminium foil, candle, sewing
needle, thermo Col, paper and pencillead. One by one bring the free ends of
the wires of your tester in contact with
two ends of the samples you havecollected  [Fig. 9.12 (b)]. Make sure that
the two wires do not touch each other
while you are doing so. Does the bulbglow in each case?
Make a table in your notebook
similar to Table 9.1, and record yourobservations.
Table 9.1 Conductors and insulators
n i d e s u t c e j b O
e h t f o e c a l p
h c t i w sl a i r e t a M
s i t i
f o e d a mb l u B
? s w o l g
) o N / s e Y (
y e K l a t e M s e Y
r e s a r E r e b b u R o N
e l a c S c i t s a l P
k c i t s h c t a M d o o W
e l g n a b s s a l G s s a l G
l i a n n o r I l a t e M
What do you find? The bulb does not
glow when the free ends of the wires arein contact with some of the materials youhave tested. This means that these
materials do not allow the electric current
to pass through them. On the other hand,some materials allow electric current to
pass through them, which is indicated
by the glowing bulb. Materials whichallow electric current to pass through
them are conductors of electricity.Caution: Your body is a conductor of
electricity. Therefore, be careful when
you handle an electrical appliance.
Rationalised 2023-24
102 SCIENCE
Fig. 9.13Electric cell is a source of electricity.
An electric cell has two terminals; one is called positive (+ ve) while the
other is negative (– ve).
An electric bulb has a filament that is connected to its  terminals.
An electric bulb glows when electric current passes through it.
In a closed electric circuit, the electric current passes from one terminal ofthe electric cell to the other terminal.
Switch is a simple device that is used to either break the electric circuit orto complete it.
Materials that allow electric current to pass through them are calledconductors.
Materials that do not allow electric current to pass through them are calledinsulators.
b l u B
s r o t c u d n o C
l l e c c i r t c e l E
t i u c r i c c i r t c e l E
1. Fill in the blanks :
(a) A device that is used to break an electric circuit is called _______________.
(b) An electric cell has _______________ terminals.
2. Mark  'True' or 'False' for following statements:
(a) Electric current can flow through metals.(b) Instead of metal wires, a jute string can be
used to make a circuit.
(c) Electric current can pass through a sheet
of thermo Col.
3. Explain why the bulb would not glow in the
arrangement shown in Fig. 9.13.
Rationalised 2023-24
103 ELECTRICITY  AND CIRCUITS
Fig. 9.14
4. Complete the drawing shown in Fig. 9.14 to
indicate where the free ends of the two wires
should be joined to make the bulb glow.
5. What is the purpose of using an electric switch?
Name some electrical gadgets that have switchesbuilt into them.
6. Would the bulb glow after completing the circuit
shown in Fig. 9.14 if instead of safety pin weuse an eraser?
7. Would the bulb glow in the circuit shown in Fig. 9.15?
8. Using the "conduction tester" on an object it was found that the bulb begins to
glow. Is that object a conductor or an insulator? Explain.
9. Why should an electrician use rubber gloves while repairing an electric switch
at your home? Explain.
10. The handles of the tools like screwdrivers and pliers used by electricians for
repair work  usually have plastic or rubber covers on them. Can you explain
why?
SOME  SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
1. Imagine there were no electric supply for a month. How would that affect your
day to day activities and others in your family? Present your imagination inthe form of a story or a play. If possible stage the play written by you or yourfriends in school.
2. For your friends, you may set up a game "How steady is your hand?". You will
need a cell, an electric bulb, a metal key, two iron nails ( about 5 cm in length),about one and a half metre long thick metal wire (with its plastic insulationscraped off ) and few pieces of connecting wires. Fix  two nails nearly one metreapart on a wooden board so that these can be used as a hook. Fix the wirebetween the nails after inserting it through the loop of the key. Connect oneend of this wire to a bulb and a cell. Connect the other terminal of the cell tothe key with a wire. Ask your friend to move the loop along the straight wirewithout touching it. Glowing of the bulb would indicate that the loop of the keyhas touched the wire.
3. Read and find out about Alessandro Volta who invented the electric cell. You
may also find out about Thomas Alva Edison who invented the electric bulb.Fig. 9.15
Rationalised 2023-24
